Computer science or computing science (abbreviated CS) is the study of the theoretical foundations of information and computation and of practical techniques for their implementation and application in computer systems.[1][2] Computer scientists invent algorithmic processes that create, describe, and transform information and formulate suitable abstractions to model complex systems.
Computer science has many sub-fields; some, such as computational complexity theory, study the properties of computational problems, while others, such ascomputer graphics, emphasize the computation of specific results. Still others focus on the challenges in implementing computations. For example, programming language theory studies approaches to describe computations, while computer programming applies specific programming languages to solve specific computational problems, and human-computer interaction focuses on the challenges in making computers and computations useful, usable, and universally accessible to humans.
The general public sometimes confuses computer science with careers that deal with computers (such as information technology), or think that it relates to their own experience of computers, which typically involves activities such as gaming, web-browsing, and word-processing. However, the focus of computer science is more on understanding the properties of the programs used to implement software such as games and web-browsers, and using that understanding to create new programs or improve existing ones.[3]
History
Main article: History of computer science
The early foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks, such as the abacus, have existed since antiquity. Wilhelm Schickard designed the first mechanical calculator in 1623, but did not complete its construction.[4] Blaise Pascal designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator, the Pascaline, in 1642. Charles Babbage designed a difference engine and then a general-purpose Analytical Engine in Victorian times,[5] for which Ada Lovelace wrote a manual. Because of this work she is regarded today as the world's first programmer.[6] Around 1900, punched card machines were introduced.
During the 1940s, as newer and more powerful computing machines were developed, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[7] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 1950s and early 1960s.[8][9] The world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of CambridgeComputer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science degree program in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[10] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own right.
Although many initially believed it was impossible that computers themselves could actually be a scientific field of study, in the late fifties it gradually became accepted among the greater academic population.[11] It is the now well-known IBM brand that formed part of the computer science revolution during this time. IBM (short for International Business Machines) released the IBM 704 and later the IBM 709 computers, which were widely used during the exploration period of such devices. "Still, working with the IBM [computer] was frustrating...if you had misplaced as much as one letter in one instruction, the program would crash, and you would have to start the whole process over again".[11] During the late 1950s, the computer science discipline was very much in its developmental stages, and such issues were commonplace.
Time has seen significant improvements in the usability and effectiveness of computer science technology. Modern society has seen a significant shift from computers being used solely by experts or professionals to a more widespread user base. Initially, computers were quite costly, and for their most-effective use, some degree of human aid was needed, in part by professional computer operators. However, as computers became widespread and far more affordable, less human assistance was needed, although residues of the original assistance still remained.
[edit]Major achievements
Despite its short history as a formal academic discipline, computer science has made a number of fundamental contributions to science and society. These include:
?	The start of the "digital revolution," which includes the current Information Age and the Internet.[13]
?	A formal definition of computation and computability, and proof that there are computationally unsolvable and intractable problems.[14]
?	The concept of a programming language, a tool for the precise expression of methodological information at various levels of abstraction.[15]
?	In cryptography, breaking the Enigma machine was an important factor contributing to the Allied victory in World War II.[12]
?	Scientific computing enabled practical evaluation of processes and situations of great complexity, as well as experimentation entirely by software. It also enabled advanced study of the mind, and mapping of the human genome became possible with the Human Genome Project.[13] Distributed computingprojects such as Folding@home explore protein folding.
?	Algorithmic trading has increased the efficiency and liquidity of financial markets by using artificial intelligence, machine learning, and other statistical andnumerical techniques on a large scale.[16]
?	Image synthesis, including video by computing individual video frames.[citation needed]
?	Human language processing, including practical speech-to-text conversion and automated translation of languages[citation needed]
Simulation of various processes, including computational fluid dynamics, physical, electrical, and electronic systems and circuits, as well as societies and social situations (notably war games) along with their habitats, among many others. Modern computers enable optimization of such designs as complete aircraft. Notable in electrical and electronic circuit design are SPICE as well as software for physical realization of new (or modified) designs. The latter includes essential design software for integrated circuits.[citation needed] Main article: Philosophy of computer science
Following Peter Wegner, Amnon H. Eden proposes that there are three paradigms at work in various areas of computer science:[17]
?	a "rationalist paradigm", which treats computer science as branch of mathematics, which is prevalent in theoretical computer science, and mainly employs deductive reasoning,
?	a "technocratic paradigm", readily identifiable with engineering approaches, most prominent in software engineering, and
?	a "scientific paradigm", which approaches computer-related artifacts from the empirical perspective of natural sciences, and identifiable in some branches of artificial intelligence (the study of artificial life for instance).
?	[edit]
Areas of computer science
As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms and the limits of computation to the practical issues of implementing computing systems in hardware and software.[18][19] CSAB, formerly called Computing Sciences Accreditation Board – which is made up of representatives of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE-CS)[20] – identifies four areas that it considers crucial to the discipline of computer science: theory of computation, algorithms and data structures, programming methodology and languages, and computer elements and architecture. In addition to these four areas, CSAB also identifies fields such as software engineering, artificial intelligence, computer networking and communication, database systems, parallel computation, distributed computation, computer-human interaction, computer graphics, operating systems, and numerical and symbolic computation as being important areas of computer science.[18]
[edit]Theoretical computer science
Main article: Theoretical computer science
The broader field of theoretical computer science encompasses both the classical theory of computation and a wide range of other topics that focus on the more abstract, logical, and mathematical aspects of computing.
[edit]Theory of computation
Main article: Theory of computation
According to Peter J. Denning, the fundamental question underlying computer science is, "What can be (efficiently) automated?"[8] The study of the theory of computation is focused on answering fundamental questions about what can be computed and what amount of resources are required to perform those computations. In an effort to answer the first question, computability theory examines which computational problems are solvable on various theoretical models of computation. The second question is addressed by computational complexity theory, which studies the time and space costs associated with different approaches to solving a multitude of computational problem.
The famous "P=NP?" problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems,[21] is an open problem in the theory of computation.
Formal methods
Main article: Formal methods
Formal methods are a particular kind of mathematically-based techniques for the specification, development and verification of software and hardware systems. The use of formal methods for software and hardware design is motivated by the expectation that, as in other engineering disciplines, performing appropriate mathematical analysis can contribute to the reliability and robustness of a design. However, the high cost of using formal methods means that they are usually only used in the development of high-integrity systems, where safety or security is of utmost importance. Formal methods are best described as the application of a fairly broad variety of theoretical computer science fundamentals, in particular logic calculi, formal languages, automata theory, and program semantics, but also type systems and algebraic data types to problems in software and hardware specification and verification.
[edit]Concurrent, parallel and distributed systems
Main articles: Concurrency (computer science) and Distributed computing
Concurrency is a property of systems in which several computations are executing simultaneously, and potentially interacting with each other. A number of mathematical models have been developed for general concurrent computation including Petri nets, process calculi and the Parallel Random Access Machine model. A distributed system extends the idea of concurrency onto multiple computers connected through a network. Computers within the same distributed system have their own private memory, and information is often exchanged amongst themselves to achieve a common goal.
[edit]Databases and information retrieval
Main articles: Database and Database management systems
A database is intended to organize, store, and retrieve large amounts of data easily. Digital databases are managed using database management systems to store, create, maintain, and search data, through database models and query languages.
 	This section requires expansion.
[edit]Applied computer science
Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed. Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy, to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. Also, in the early days of computing, a number of terms for the practitioners of the field of computing were suggested in the Communications of the ACM – turingineer, turologist, flow-charts-man, applied meta-mathematician, and applied epistemologist.[22] Three months later in the same journal, comptologist was suggested, followed next year by hypologist.[23] The term computics has also been suggested.[24] In continental Europe, terms cognate with "information" are often used, e.g. informatique (French), Informatik (German) or informatika (Slavic languages) are also used.[citation needed]
Renowned computer scientist Edsger Dijkstra once stated: "Computer science is no more about computers than astronomy is about telescopes." The design and deployment of computers and computer systems is generally considered the province of disciplines other than computer science. For example, the study of computer hardware is usually considered part of computer engineering, while the study of commercial computer systems and their deployment is often called information technology or information systems. However, there has been much cross-fertilization of ideas between the various computer-related disciplines. Computer science research also often intersects other disciplines, such as philosophy, cognitive science, linguistics, mathematics, physics, statistics, andeconomics.
Computer science is considered by some to have a much closer relationship with mathematics than many scientific disciplines, with some observers saying that computing is a mathematical science.[8] Early computer science was strongly influenced by the work of mathematicians such as Kurt Gödel and Alan Turing, and there continues to be a useful interchange of ideas between the two fields in areas such as mathematical logic, category theory, domain theory, and algebra.
The relationship between computer science and software engineering is a contentious issue, which is further muddied by disputes over what the term "software engineering" means, and how computer science is defined. David Parnas, taking a cue from the relationship between other engineering and science disciplines, has claimed that the principal focus of computer science is studying the properties of computation in general, while the principal focus of software engineering is the design of specific computations to achieve practical goals, making the two separate but complementary disciplines.[25]
The academic, political, and funding aspects of computer science tend to depend on whether a department formed with a mathematical emphasis or with an engineering emphasis. Computer science departments with a mathematics emphasis and with a numerical orientation consider alignment with computational science. Both types of departments tend to make efforts to bridge the field educationally if not across all research.
[edit]Artificial intelligence
Main article: Artificial intelligence
This branch of computer science aims to create synthetic systems which solve computational problems, reason and/or communicate like animals and humans do. This theoretical and applied subfield requires a very rigorous and integrated expertise in multiple subject areas such as applied mathematics, logic, semiotics, electrical engineering, philosophy of mind, neurophysiology, and social intelligence which can be used to advance the field of intelligence research or be applied to other subject areas which require computational understanding and modelling such as in finance or thephysical sciences. This field started in full earnest when Alan Turing, the pioneer of computer science and artificial intelligence, proposed the Turing Test for the purpose of answering the ultimate question... "Can computers think ?".
Some universities teach computer science as a theoretical study of computation and algorithmic reasoning. These programs often feature the theory of computation, analysis of algorithms, formal methods, concurrency theory, databases, computer graphics, and systems analysis, among others. They typically also teach computer programming, but treat it as a vessel for the support of other fields of computer science rather than a central focus of high-level study.
Other colleges and universities, as well as secondary schools and vocational programs that teach computer science, emphasize the practice of advanced programming rather than the theory of algorithms and computation in their computer science curricula. Such curricula tend to focus on those skills that are important to workers entering the software industry. The process aspects of computer programming are often referred to as software engineering.
Yet while computer science professions increasingly drive the U.S. economy, computer science education is absent in most American K-12 curricula. A report entitled "Running on Empty: The Failure to Teach K-12 Computer Science in the Digital Age" was released in October 2010 by Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) and Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA), and revealed that only 14 states have adopted significant education standards for high school computer science. The report also found that only nine states count high school computer science courses as a core academic subject in their graduation requirements. In tandem with "Running on Empty," a new, non-partisan advocacy coalition--Computing in the Core (CinC)--was founded to influence federal and state policy, such as the Computer Science Education Act, which calls for grants to states to develop plans for improving computer science education and supporting computer science teachers.
remains popular, responsible for some of English literature's most iconic characters.[1]
Many of his novels, with their recurrent concern for social reform, first appeared in magazines in serialised form, a popular format at the time. Unlike other authors who completed entire novels before serialisation, Dickens often created the episodes as they were being serialised. The practice lent his stories a particular rhythm, punctuated by cliffhangers to keep the public looking forward to the next installment.[2] The continuing popularity of his novels and short stories is such that they have never gone out of print.[3]
His work has been praised for its realism, mastery of prose, comic genius and unique personalities by writers such as George Gissing, Leo Tolstoy, and G. K. Chesterton; though others, such as Henry James and Virginia Woolf, criticised it for sentimentality and implausibility.[4]
Charles Dickens was born in 1812. Having spent the first three years of his life in Portsmouth, Hampshire, the family moved to London in 1815. His early years seem to have been idyllic, although he thought himself as a "very small and not-over-particularly-taken-care-of boy".[5] He spent time outdoors, but also read voraciously, especially the picaresque novels of Tobias Smollett and Henry Fielding. He spoke, later in life, of his poignant memories of childhood, and of his near-photographic memory of the people and events, which he used in his writing. His father's brief period as a clerk in the Navy Pay Office afforded Charles a few years of private education at William Giles's School, in Chatham.[6]
This period came to an abrupt end when John Dickens spent beyond his means and was imprisoned in the Marshalseadebtor's prison in Southwark, London. Shortly afterwards, the rest of his family joined him – except Charles, who boarded with family friend Elizabeth Roylance in Camden Town.[7] Mrs. Roylance was "a reduced old lady, long known to our family", whom Dickens later immortalised, "with a few alterations and embellishments", as "Mrs. Pipchin", in Dombey and Son. Later, he lived in a "back-attic...at the house of an insolvent-court agent...in Lant Street in The Borough...he was a fat, good-natured, kind old gentleman, with a quiet old wife"; and he had a very innocent grown-up son; these three were the inspiration for the Garland family in The Old Curiosity Shop.[8]
The Marshalsea around 1897, after it had closed
On Sundays, Dickens and his sister Fanny were allowed out from the Royal Academy of Music and spent the day at the Marshalsea.[9] (Dickens later used the prison as a setting in Little Dorrit). To pay for his board and to help his family, Dickens began working ten-hour days at Warren's Blacking Warehouse, on Hungerford Stairs, near the present Charing Cross railway station. He earned six shillings a week pasting labels on shoe polish. The strenuous – and often cruel – work conditions made a deep impression on Dickens, and later influenced his fiction and essays, forming foundation of his interest in the reform of socio-economic and labour conditions, the rigors of which he believed were unfairly borne by the poor. As told to John Forster (from The Life of Charles Dickens):

A 1904 artist's impression of Dickens in the shoe-polish factory
The blacking-warehouse was the last house on the left-hand side of the way, at old Hungerford Stairs. It was a crazy, tumble-down old house, abutting of course on the river, and literally overrun with rats. Its wainscoted rooms, and its rotten floors and staircase, and the old grey rats swarming down in the cellars, and the sound of their squeaking and scuffling coming up the stairs at all times, and the dirt and decay of the place, rise up visibly before me, as if I were there again. The counting-house was on the first floor, looking over the coal-barges and the river. There was a recess in it, in which I was to sit and work. My work was to cover the pots of paste-blacking; first with a piece of oil-paper, and then with a piece of blue paper; to tie them round with a string; and then to clip the paper close and neat, all round, until it looked as smart as a pot of ointment from an apothecary's shop. When a certain number of grosses of pots had attained this pitch of perfection, I was to paste on each a printed label, and then go on again with more pots. Two or three other boys were kept at similar duty down-stairs on similar wages. One of them came up, in a ragged apron and a paper cap, on the first Monday morning, to show me the trick of using the string and tying the knot. His name was Bob Fagin; and I took the liberty of using his name, long afterwards, in Oliver Twist.[8]
After only a few months in Marshalsea, John Dickens' paternal grandmother, Elizabeth Dickens, died and bequeathed him the sum of £450. On the expectation of this legacy, Dickens was granted release from prison. Under the Insolvent Debtors Act, Dickens arranged for payment of his creditors, and he and his family left Marshalsea for the home of Mrs. Roylance.
Although Dickens eventually attended the Wellington House Academy in North London, his mother Elizabeth Dickens did not immediately remove him from the boot-blacking factory. 'The incident must have done much to confirm Dickens's determined view that a father should rule the family, a mother find her proper sphere inside the home. "I never afterwards forgot, I never shall forget, I never can forget, that my mother was warm for my being sent back." His mother's failure to request his return was no doubt a factor in his demanding and dissatisfied attitude towards women.'[9] Resentment stemming from his situation and the conditions under which working-class people lived became major themes of his works, and it was this unhappy period in his youth to which he alluded in his favourite, and most autobiographical, novel, David Copperfield:[10] "I had no advice, no counsel, no encouragement, no consolation, no assistance, no support, of any kind, from anyone, that I can call to mind, as I hope to go to heaven!" The Wellington House Academy was not a good school. 'Much of the haphazard, desultory teaching, poor discipline punctuated by the headmaster's sadistic brutality, the seedy ushers and general run-down atmosphere, are embodied in Mr. Creakle's Establishment in David Copperfield.'[9] Dickens worked at the law office of Ellis and Blackmore, attorneys, of Holborn Court, Gray's Inn, as a junior clerk from May 1827 to November 1828. Then, having learned Gurneys system of shorthand in his spare time, he left to become a freelance reporter. A distant relative, Thomas Charlton, was a freelance reporter at Doctors' Commons, and Dickens was able to share his box there to report the legal proceedings for nearly four years.[11] This education informed works such as Nicholas Nickleby, Dombey and Son, and especially Bleak House—whose vivid portrayal of the machinations and bureaucracy of the legal system did much to enlighten the general public, and was a vehicle for dissemination of Dickens's own views regarding, particularly, the heavy burden on the poor who were forced by circumstances to "go to law".
In 1830, Dickens met his first love, Maria Beadnell, thought to have been the model for the character Dora in David Copperfield. Maria's parents disapproved of the courtship and effectively ended the relationship by sending her to school in Paris.
Journalism and early novels
In May 1846, Angela Burdett Coutts, heir to the Coutts banking fortune, approached Dickens about setting up a home for the redemption of "fallen" women. Coutts envisioned a home that would differ from existing institutions, which offered a harsh and punishing regimen for these women, and instead provide an environment where they could learn to read and write and become proficient in domestic household chores so as to re-integrate them into society. After initially resisting, Dickens eventually founded the home, named Urania Cottage, in the Lime Grove section of Shepherds Bush. He became involved in many aspects of its day-to-day running, setting the house rules, reviewing the accounts and interviewing prospective residents, some of whom became characters in his books. He would scour prisons and workhouses for potentially suitable candidates and relied on friends, such as the Magistrate John Hardwick to bring them to his attention. Each potential candidate was given a printed invitation written by Dickens called ‘An Appeal to Fallen Women’,[21] which he signed only as ‘Your friend’. If the woman accepted the invitation, Dickens would personally interview her for admission.[22][23] All of the women were required to emigrate following their time at Urania Cottage. In research published in 2009, the families of two of these women were identified, one in Canada and one in Australia. It is estimated that about 100 women graduated between 1847 and 1859.[24]

 
Dickens painted by Ary Scheffer, 1855. Dickens wrote to John Forster of the experience: "I can scarcely express how uneasy and unsettled it makes me to sit, sit, sit, with Little Dorrit on my mind."
In late November 1851, Dickens moved into Tavistock House[25] where he would write Bleak House (1852–53), Hard Times (1854) and Little Dorrit (1857). It was here he got up the amateur theatricals which are described in Forster's Life.
In 1856, his income from his writing allowed him to buy Gad's Hill Place in Higham, Kent. As a child, Dickens had walked past the house and dreamed of living in it. The area was also the scene of some of the events ofShakespeare's Henry IV, Part 1 and this literary connection pleased him.
In 1857, Dickens hired professional actresses for the play The Frozen Deep, which he and his protégé Wilkie Collinshad written. With one of these, Ellen Ternan, Dickens formed a bond which was to last the rest of his life. He then separated from his wife, Catherine, in 1858 – divorce was still unthinkable for someone as famous as he was.
During this period, whilst pondering about giving public readings for his own profit, Dickens was approached by Great Ormond Street Hospital to help it survive its first major financial crisis through a charitable appeal. Dickens, whose philanthropy was well-known, was asked to preside by his friend, the hospital's founder Charles West. He threw himself into the task, heart and soul[26] (a little known fact is that Dickens reported anonymously in the weekly The Examiner in 1849 to help mishandled children and wrote another article to help publicise the hospital's opening in 1852).[27] On 9 February 1858, Dickens spoke at the hospital's first annual festival dinner at Freemasons' Hall and later gave a public reading of A Christmas Carol at St. Martin-in-the-Fields church hall. The events raised enough money to enable the hospital to purchase the neighbouring house, No. 48 Great Ormond Street, increasing the bed capacity from 20 to 75.[28]
That summer of 1858, after separating from his wife,[29] Dickens undertook his first series of public readings in London for pay which ended on 22 July. After 10 days rest, he began a gruelling and ambitious tour through the English provinces, Scotland and Ireland, beginning with a performance in Clifton on 2 August and closing in Brighton, more than three months later, on 13 November. Altogether he read eighty-seven times, on some days giving both a matinée and an evening performance.[30]

At his desk in 1858
Major works, A Tale of Two Cities (1859); and Great Expectations (1861) soon followed and would prove resounding successes. During this time he was also the publisher and editor of, and a major contributor to, the journals Household Words (1850–1859) and All the Year Round (1858–1870).
In early September 1860, in a field behind Gad's Hill, Dickens made a great bonfire of nearly his entire correspondence. Only those letters on business matters were spared. Since Ellen Ternan burned all of his letters as well, the dimensions of the affair between the two were unknown until the publication ofDickens and Daughter, a book about Dickens's relationship with his daughter Kate, in 1939. Kate Dickens worked with author Gladys Storey on the book prior to her death in 1929, and alleged that Dickens and Ternan had a son who died in infancy, though no contemporary evidence exists.[31] On his death, Dickens settled an annuity on Ternan which made her a financially independent woman. Claire Tomalin's book, The Invisible Woman, set out to prove that Ternan lived with Dickens secretly for the last 13 years of his life, and was subsequently turned into a play, Little Nell, by Simon Gray.
In the same period, Dickens furthered his interest in the paranormal, so much that he was one of the early members of The Ghost Club.[32]
Franklin incident
A recurring theme in Dickens's writing reflected the public's interest in Arctic exploration: the heroic friendship between explorers John Franklin and John Richardson gave the idea for A Tale of Two Cities, The Wreck of the Golden Mary and the play The Frozen Deep.[33]
After Franklin died in unexplained circumstances on an expedition to find the North West Passage, Dickens wrote a piece in Household Words defending his hero against the discovery in 1854, some four years after the search began, of evidence that Franklin's men had, in their desperation, resorted to cannibalism.[34] Without adducing any supporting evidence he speculates that, far from resorting to cannibalism amongst themselves, the members of the expedition may have been "set upon and slain by the Esquimaux ... We believe every savage to be in his heart covetous, treacherous, and cruel."[34] Although publishing in a subsequent issue ofHousehold Words a defence of the Esquimaux, written by John Rae, one of Franklin's rescue parties, who had actually visited the scene of the supposed cannibalism, Dickens refused to alter his view.[35]
Last years
Crash scene after the Staplehurst rail crash
On 9 June 1865,[36] while returning from Paris with Ternan, Dickens was involved in the Staplehurst rail crash. The first seven carriages of the train plunged off a cast iron bridge under repair. The only first-class carriage to remain on the track was the one in which Dickens was travelling. Dickens tried to help the wounded and the dying before rescuers arrived. Before leaving, he remembered the unfinished manuscript for Our Mutual Friend, and he returned to his carriage to retrieve it. Typically, Dickens later used this experience as material for his short ghost story The Signal-Man in which the central character has a premonition of his own death in a rail crash. He based the story around several previous rail accidents, such as the Clayton Tunnel rail crash of 1861.
Dickens managed to avoid an appearance at the inquest, to avoid disclosing that he had been travelling with Ternan and her mother, which would have caused a scandal. Although physically unharmed, Dickens never really recovered from the trauma of the Staplehurst crash, and his normally prolific writing shrank to completing Our Mutual Friend and starting the unfinished The Mystery of Edwin Drood. Much of his time was taken up with public readings from his best-loved novels. Dickens was fascinated by the theatre as an escape from the world, and theatres and theatrical people appear in Nicholas Nickleby. The travelling shows were extremely popular. In 1866, a series of public readings were undertaken in England and Scotland. The following year saw more readings in England and Ireland.

On 9 November 1867, Dickens sailed from Liverpool for his second American reading tour. Landing at Boston, he devoted the rest of the month to a round of dinners with such notables as Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and his American publisher James Thomas Fields. In early December, the readings began and Dickens spent the month shuttling between Boston and New York. Although he had started to suffer from what he called the "true American catarrh", he kept to a schedule that would have challenged a much younger man, even managing to squeeze in some sleighing in Central Park. In New York, he gave 22 readings atSteinway Hall between 9 December 1867 and 18 April 1868, and four at Plymouth Church of the Pilgrims between 16 January and 21 January 1868. During his travels, he saw a significant change in the people and the circumstances of America. His final appearance was at a banquet the American Press held in his honour atDelmonico's on 18 April, when he promised to never denounce America again. By the end of the tour, the author could hardly manage solid food, subsisting on champagne and eggs beaten in sherry. On 23 April, he boarded his ship to return to Britain, barely escaping a Federal Tax Lien against the proceeds of his lecture tour.[18]
Farewell readings
Between 1868 and 1869, Dickens gave a series of "farewell readings" in England, Scotland, and Ireland, until he collapsed on 22 April 1869, at Preston in Lancashireshowing symptoms of a mild stroke.[37] After further provincial readings were cancelled, he began work on his final novel, The Mystery of Edwin Drood. In an opium denin Shadwell, he witnessed an elderly pusher known as "Opium Sal", who subsequently featured in his mystery novel.
Poster promoting a reading by Dickens in Nottingham dated 4 Feb. 1869; two months before he suffered a mild stroke
When he had regained sufficient strength, Dickens arranged, with medical approval, for a final series of readings at least partially to make up to his sponsors what they had lost due of his illness. There were to be twelve performances, running between 11 January and 15 March 1870, the last taking place at 8:00 pm at St. James's Hall in London. Although in grave health by this time, he read A Christmas Carol and The Trial from Pickwick. On 2 May, he made his last public appearance at a Royal Academy Banquet in the presence of the Prince and Princess of Wales, paying a special tribute to the passing of his friend, illustrator Daniel Maclise.[38]
Death
On 8 June 1870, Dickens suffered another stroke at his home, after a full day's work on Edwin Drood. The next day, on 9 June, and five years to the day after the Staplehurst crash, he died at Gad's Hill Place never having regained consciousness. Contrary to his wish to be buried at Rochester Cathedral "in an inexpensive, unostentatious, and strictly private manner", he was laid to rest in the Poets' Corner of Westminster Abbey.[39] A printed epitaph circulated at the time of the funeral reads: "To the Memory of Charles Dickens (England's most popular author) who died at his residence, Higham, near Rochester, Kent, 9 June 1870, aged 58 years. He was a sympathiser with the poor, the suffering, and the oppressed; and by his death, one of England's greatest writers is lost to the world."[40] Dickens's last words, as reported in his obituary in The Times were alleged to have been:
Be natural my children. For the writer that is natural has fullfilled all the rules of art.[41]
On Sunday, 19 June 1870, five days after Dickens's interment in the Abbey, Dean Arthur Penrhyn Stanley delivered a memorial elegy, lauding "the genial and loving humorist whom we now mourn", for showing by his own example "that even in dealing with the darkest scenes and the most degraded characters, genius could still be clean, and mirth could be innocent." Pointing to the fresh flowers that adorned the novelist's grave, Stanley assured those present that "the spot would thenceforth be a sacred one with both the New World and the Old, as that of the representative of literature, not of this island only, but of all who speak our English tongue."[42]
Dickens's will stipulated that no memorial be erected to honour him. The only life-size bronze statue of Dickens, cast in 1891 by Francis Edwin Elwell, is located in Clark Park in the Spruce Hillneighbourhood of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in the United States. The couch on which he died is preserved at the Dickens Birthplace Museum in Portsmouth.
Literary style
Dickens loved the style of the 18th century picturesque or Gothic romance novels,[citation needed] although it had already become a target for parody.[43] One "character" vividly drawn throughout his novels is London itself. From the coaching inns on the outskirts of the city to the lower reaches of the Thames, all aspects of the capital are described over the course of his body of work.
His writing style is florid and poetic, with a strong comic touch. His satires of British aristocratic snobbery—he calls one character the "Noble Refrigerator"—are often popular. Comparing orphans to stocks and shares, people to tug boats, or dinner-party guests to furniture are just some of Dickens's acclaimed flights of fancy. Many of his characters' names provide the reader with a hint as to the roles played in advancing the storyline, such as Mr. Murdstone in the novel David Copperfield, which is clearly a combination of "murder" and stony coldness. His literary style is also a mixture offantasy and realism.
Characters
'Dickens' Dream' by Robert William Buss, portraying Dickens at his desk at Gads Hill Placesurrounded by many of his characters
Dickens is famed for his depiction of the hardships of the working class, his intricate plots, and his sense of humour. But he is perhaps most famed for the characters he created. His novels were heralded early in his career for their ability to capture the everyday man and thus create characters to whom readers could relate. Beginning with The Pickwick Papers in 1836, Dickens wrote numerous novels, each uniquely filled with believable personalities and vivid physical descriptions. Dickens's friend and biographer, John Forster, said that Dickens made "characters real existences, not by describing them but by letting them describe themselves."[44]
Dickensian characters—especially their typically whimsical names—are among the most memorable in English literature. The likes of Ebenezer Scrooge, Tiny Tim, Jacob Marley, Bob Cratchit, Oliver Twist, The Artful Dodger, Fagin, Bill Sikes, Pip, Miss Havisham, Charles Darnay, David Copperfield, Mr. Micawber, Abel Magwitch, Daniel Quilp, Samuel Pickwick, Wackford Squeers, Uriah Heep and many others are so well known and can be believed to be living a life outside the novels that their stories have been continued by other authors.[citation needed]
The author worked closely with his illustrators supplying them with a summary of the work at the outset and thus ensuring that his characters and settings were exactly how he envisioned them.[45] He would brief the illustrator on plans for each month's instalment so that work could begin before he wrote them. Marcus Stone, illustrator of Our Mutual Friend, recalled that the author was always "ready to describe down to the minutest details the personal characteristics, and ... life-history of the creations of his fancy."[30] This close working relationship is important to readers of Dickens today. The illustrations give us a glimpse of the characters as Dickens described them. Film makers still use the illustrations as a basis for characterisation, costume, and set design.
Often these characters were based on people he knew. In a few instances Dickens based the character too closely on the original, as in the case of Harold Skimpole in Bleak House, based on Leigh Hunt, and Miss Mowcher in David Copperfield, based on his wife's dwarf chiropodist. Indeed, the acquaintances made when reading a Dickens novel are not easily forgotten. The author, Virginia Woolf, maintained that "we remodel our psychological geography when we read Dickens" as he produces "characters who exist not in detail, not accurately or exactly, but abundantly in a cluster of wild yet extraordinarily revealing remarks."[46]
Autobiographical elements

A color engraving from Oliver Twist, byGeorge Cruikshank
All authors might be said to incorporate autobiographical elements in their fiction, but with Dickens this is very noticeable, even though he took pains to mask what he considered his shameful, lowly past. David Copperfield is one of the most clearly autobiographical but the scenes from Bleak House of interminable court cases and legal arguments are drawn from the author's brief career as a court reporter. Dickens's own father was sent to prison for debt, and this became a common theme in many of his books, with the detailed depiction of life in the Marshalsea prison in Little Dorrit resulting from Dickens's own experiences of the institution. Childhood sweethearts in many of his books (such as Little Em'ly in David Copperfield) may have been based on Dickens's own childhood infatuation with Lucy Stroughill.[47][48] Dickens may have drawn on his childhood experiences, but he was also ashamed of them and would not reveal that this was where he gathered his realistic accounts of squalor. Very few knew the details of his early life until six years after his death when John Forster published a biography on which Dickens had collaborated. As noted above, most of Dickens's major novels were first written in monthly or weekly installments in journals such as Master Humphrey's Clock andHousehold Words, later reprinted in book form. These instalments made the stories cheap, accessible and the series of regular cliff-hangers made each new episode widely anticipated. American fans even waited at the docks in New York, shouting out to the crew of an incoming ship, "Is little Nell dead?"[49][50][51]Part of Dickens's great talent was to incorporate this episodic writing style but still end up with a coherent novel at the end. The monthly numbers were illustrated by, amongst others, "Phiz" (a pseudonym for Hablot Browne). Among his best-known works are Great Expectations, David Copperfield, Oliver Twist, A Tale of Two Cities, Bleak House, Nicholas Nickleby, The Pickwick Papers, and A Christmas Carol.

"Charles Dickens as he appears when reading." Wood engraving from Harper's Weekly, 7 December 1867
Dickens's technique of writing in monthly or weekly instalments (depending on the work) can be understood by analysing his relationship with his illustrators. The several artists who filled this role were privy to the contents and intentions of Dickens's instalments before the general public. Thus, by reading these correspondences between author and illustrator, the intentions behind Dickens's work can be better understood. These also reveal how the interests of the reader and author do not coincide. A great example of that appears in the monthly novel Oliver Twist. At one point in this work, Dickens had Oliver become embroiled in a robbery. That particular monthly instalment concludes with young Oliver being shot. Readers expected that they would be forced to wait only a month to find out the outcome of that gunshot. In fact, Dickens did not reveal what became of young Oliver in the succeeding number. Rather, the reading public was forced to wait two months to discover if the boy lived.
Another important impact of Dickens's episodic writing style resulted from his exposure to the opinions of his readers. Since Dickens did not write the chapters very far ahead of their publication, he was allowed to witness the public reaction and alter the story depending on those public reactions. A fine example of this process can be seen in his weekly serial The Old Curiosity Shop, which is a chase story. In this novel, Nell and her grandfather are fleeing the villain Quilp. The progress of the novel follows the gradual success of that pursuit. As Dickens wrote and published the weekly instalments, his friend John Forster pointed out: "You know you're going to have to kill her, don't you?" Why this end was necessary can be explained by a brief analysis of the difference between the structure of a comedy versus a tragedy. In a comedy, the action covers a sequence "You think they're going to lose, you think they're going to lose, they win". In tragedy, it is: "You think they're going to win, you think they're going to win, they lose". The dramatic conclusion of the story is implicit throughout the novel. So, as Dickens wrote the novel in the form of a tragedy, the sad outcome of the novel was a foregone conclusion. If he had not caused his heroine to lose, he would not have completed his dramatic structure. Dickens admitted that his friend Forster was right and, in the end, Nell died.[52]
Social commentary
Dickens's novels were, among other things, works of social commentary. He was a fierce critic of the poverty and social stratification of Victorian society. Dickens's second novel, Oliver Twist (1839), shocked readers with its images of poverty and crime and was responsible for the clearing of the actual London slum, Jacob's Island, that was the basis of the story. In addition, with the character of the tragic prostitute, Nancy, Dickens "humanised" such women for the reading public; women who were regarded as "unfortunates", inherently immoral casualties of the Victorian class/economic system.Bleak House and Little Dorrit elaborated expansive critiques of the Victorian institutional apparatus: the interminable lawsuits of the Court of Chancery that destroyed people's lives in Bleak House and a dual attack in Little Dorrit on inefficient, corrupt patent offices and unregulated market speculation.
Literary techniques
 
Stamp in "The Centenary Edition of The Works of Charles Dickens in 36 Volumes."
Dickens is often described as using 'idealised' characters and highly sentimental scenes to contrast with his caricatures and the ugly social truths he reveals. The story of Nell Trent in The Old Curiosity Shop (1841) was received as incredibly moving by contemporary readers but viewed as ludicrously sentimental byOscar Wilde. "You would need to have a heart of stone", he declared in one of his famous witticisms, "not to laugh at the death of little Nell."[53] (although her death actually takes place off-stage). In 1903 G. K. Chesterton said, "It is not the death of little Nell, but the life of little Nell, that I object to."[54]
In Oliver Twist Dickens provides readers with an idealised portrait of a boy so inherently and unrealistically 'good' that his values are never subverted by either brutal orphanages or coerced involvement in a gang of young pickpockets. While later novels also centre on idealised characters (Esther Summerson in Bleak House and Amy Dorrit in Little Dorrit), this idealism serves only to highlight Dickens's goal of poignant social commentary. Many of his novels are concerned with social 
Dickens influenced many aspects of Christmas that are celebrated today among Western nations, such as family gatherings, seasonal food and drink, dancing, games, and a festive generosity of spirit.[63] A Christmas Carol rejuvenated his career as a renowned author. A Tale of Two Cities is Dickens best selling novel. Since its inaugural publication in 1859, the novel has sold over 200 million copies, and is among the most famous works of fiction.[64]
Blue plaque in Tavistock Square,London, commemorating Dickens and Tavistock House
At a time when Britain was the major economic and political power of the world, Dickens highlighted the life of the forgotten poor and disadvantaged at the heart ofempire. Through his journalism he campaigned on specific issues—such as sanitation and the workhouse—but his fiction probably demonstrated its greatest prowess in changing public opinion in regard to class inequalities. He often depicted the exploitation and repression of the poor and condemned the public officials and institutions that not only allowed such abuses to exist, but flourished as a result. His most strident indictment of this condition is in Hard Times (1854), Dickens's only novel-length treatment of the industrial working class. In this work, he uses both vitriol and satire to illustrate how this marginalised social stratum was termed "Hands" by the factory owners; that is, not really "people" but rather only appendages of the machines that they operated. His writings inspired others, in particular journalists and political figures, to address such problems of class oppression. For example, the prison scenes in The Pickwick Papers are claimed to have been influential in having the Fleet Prison shut down. As Karl Marx said, Dickens, and the other novelists of Victorian England, "...issued to the world more political and social truths than have been uttered by all the professional politicians, publicists and moralists put together...".[65] The exceptional popularity of his novels, even those with socially oppositional themes (Bleak House, 1853; Little Dorrit, 1857; Our Mutual Friend, 1865) underscored not only his almost preternatural ability to create compelling storylines and unforgettable characters, but also ensured that the Victorian public confronted issues of social justice that had commonly been ignored.
His fiction, with often vivid descriptions of life in nineteenth century England, has inaccurately and anachronistically come to symbolise on a global level Victorian society (1837 – 1901) as uniformly "Dickensian", when in fact, his novels' time span spanned from the 1770s to the 1860s. In the decade following his death in 1870, a more intense degree of socially and philosophically pessimistic perspectives invested British fiction; such themes stood in marked contrast to the religious faith that ultimately held together even the bleakest of Dickens's novels. Dickens clearly influenced later Victorian novelists such as Thomas Hardy and George Gissing; their works display a greater willingness to confront and challenge the Victorian institution of religion. They also portray characters caught up by social forces (primarily via lower-class conditions), but they usually steered them to tragic ends beyond their control.
Novelists continue to be influenced by his books; for instance, such disparate current writers as Anne Rice, Tom Wolfe, and John Irving evidence direct Dickensian connections. Humorist James Finn Garner even wrote a tongue-in-cheek "politically correct" version of A Christmas Carol, and other affectionate parodies include the Radio 4 comedy Bleak Expectations. Matthew Pearl's novel The Last Dickens is a thriller about how Charles Dickens would have ended The Mystery of Edwin Drood. In the UK survey entitled The Big Read carried out by the BBC in 2003, five of Dickens' books were named in the Top 100, featuring alongside Terry Pratchett with the most.[66]
Although Dickens's life has been the subject of at least two TV miniseries, a television film The Great Inimitable Mr. Dickens in which he was portrayed by Anthony Hopkins, and two famous one-man shows, he has never been the subject of a Hollywood big screen biography.[67]
Allegations of anti-Semitism and racism

  waits to be hanged.
Paul Vallely writes in The Independent that Dickens's Fagin in Oliver Twist —the Jew who runs a school in London for child pickpockets—is widely seen as one of the most grotesque Jews in English literature, and the most vivid of Dickens's 989 characters.[68]
The mud lay thick upon the stones, and a black mist hung over the streets; the rain fell sluggishly down, and everything felt cold and clammy to the touch. It seemed just the night when it befitted such a being as the Jew to be abroad. As he glided stealthily along, creeping beneath the shelter of the walls and doorways, the hideous old man seemed like some loathsome reptile, engendered in the slime and darkness through which he moved, crawling forth by night in search of some rich offal for a meal.[69]
The character is thought to have been partly based on Ikey Solomon, a 19th century Jewish criminal in London, who was interviewed by Dickens during the latter's time as a journalist.[70] Nadia Valdman, who writes about the portrayal of Jews in literature, argues that Fagin's representation was drawn from the image of the Jew as inherently evil, that the imagery associated him with the Devil, and with beasts.[71]
The novel refers to Fagin 257 times in the first 38 chapters as "the Jew", while the ethnicity or religion of the other characters is not mentioned.[68] In 1854, the Jewish Chronicle asked why "Jews alone should be excluded from the 'sympathizing heart' of this great author and powerful friend of the oppressed." Eliza Davis, whose husband had purchased Dickens's home in 1860 when he had put it up for sale, wrote to Dickens in protest at his portrayal of Fagin, arguing that he had "encouraged a vile prejudice against the despised Hebrew", and that he had done a great wrong to the Jewish people. Dickens had described her husband at the time of the sale as a "Jewish moneylender", though also someone he came to know as an honest gentleman.
Dickens took her complaint seriously. He halted the printing of Oliver Twist, and changed the text for the parts of the book that had not been set, which is why Fagin is called "the Jew" 257 times in the first 38 chapters, but barely at all in the next 179 references to him. In his next novel, Our Mutual Friend, he created the character of Riah (meaning "friend" in Hebrew), whose goodness, Vallely writes, is almost as complete as Fagin's evil. Riah says in the novel: "Men say, 'This is a bad Greek, but there are good Greeks. This is a bad Turk, but there are good Turks.' Not so with the Jews ... they take the worst of us as samples of the best ..." Davis sent Dickens a copy of the Hebrew bible in gratitude.[68]
His views on the Inuit are detailed in the Franklin incident above. Dickens's attitudes towards blacks were also complex; Although he fiercely opposed the inhumanity of slavery in the United States, and expressed a desire for African American emancipation. In American Notes, he includes a comic episode with a black coach driver, presenting a grotesque description focused on the man's dark complexion and way of movement, which to Dickens amounts to an "insane imitation of an English coachman".[72] In 1868, alluding to the then poor intellectual condition of the black population in America, Dickens railed against "the mechanical absurdity of giving these people votes", which "at any rate at present, would glare out of every roll of their eyes, chuckle in their mouths, and bump in their heads."[72]
In The Perils of Certain English Prisoners Dickens offers an allegory of the Indian Mutiny, where the "native Sambo", a perverted paradigm of the Indian mutineers,[73] is a "double-dyed traitor, and a most infernal villain" who takes part in a massacre of women and children, in an allusion to the Cawnpore Massacre.[74] Dickens was much incensed by the massacre, in which over a hundred English prisoners, most of them women and children, were killed, and on 4 October 1857 wrote in a private letter to Baroness Burdett-Coutts: "I wish I were the Commander in Chief in India. ... I should do my utmost to exterminate the Race upon whom the stain of the late cruelties rested ... proceeding, with all convenient dispatch and merciful swiftness of execution, to blot it out of mankind and raze it off the face of the earth.
The primary goal of bioinformatics is to increase the understanding of biological processes. What sets it apart from other approaches, however, is its focus on developing and applying computationally intensive techniques (e.g., pattern recognition, data mining, machine learning algorithms, and visualization) to achieve this goal. Major research efforts in the field include sequence alignment, gene finding, genome assembly, drug design, drug discovery, protein structure alignment, protein structure prediction, prediction of gene expression and protein–protein interactions, genome-wide association studies and the modeling of evolution.
The term bioinformatics was coined by Paulien Hogeweg and Ben Hesper in 1978 for the study of informatic processes in biotic systems.[1][2] Its primary use since at least the late 1980s has been in genomics and genetics, particularly in those areas of genomics involving large-scale DNA sequencing.
Bioinformatics now entails the creation and advancement of databases, algorithms, computational and statistical techniques and theory to solve formal and practical problems arising from the management and analysis of biological data.
Over the past few decades rapid developments in genomic and other molecular research technologies and developments in information technologies have combined to produce a tremendous amount of information related to molecular biology. It is the name given to these mathematical and computing approaches used to glean understanding of biological processes.
Common activities in bioinformatics include mapping and analyzing DNA and protein sequences, aligning different DNA and protein sequences to compare them and creating and viewing 3-D models of protein structures.
Shotgun sequencing is the method of choice for virtually all genomes sequenced today, and genome assembly algorithms are a critical area of bioinformatics research.
Another aspect of bioinformatics in sequence analysis is annotation, which involves computational gene finding to search for protein-coding genes, RNA genes, and other functional sequences within a genome. Not all of the nucleotides within a genome are part of genes. Within the genome of higher organisms, large parts of the DNA do not serve any obvious purpose. This so-called junk DNA may, however, contain unrecognized functional elements. Bioinformatics helps to bridge the gap between genome and proteome projects — for example, in the use of DNA sequences for protein identification.
See also: sequence analysis, sequence profiling tool, and sequence motif
[edit]Genome annotation
Main article: Gene finding
In the context of genomics, annotation is the process of marking the genes and other biological features in a DNA sequence. The first genome annotation software system was designed in 1995 by Dr. Owen White, who was part of the team at The Institute for Genomic Research that sequenced and analyzed the first genome of a free-living organism to be decoded, the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. Dr. White built a software system to find the genes (places in the DNA sequence that encode a protein), the transfer RNA, and other features, and to make initial assignments of function to those genes. Most current genome annotation systems work similarly, but the programs available for analysis of genomic DNA are constantly changing and improving.
[edit]Computational evolutionary biology
Evolutionary biology is the study of the origin and descent of species, as well as their change over time. Informatics has assisted evolutionary biologists in several key ways; it has enabled researchers to:
?	trace the evolution of a large number of organisms by measuring changes in their DNA, rather than through physical taxonomy or physiological observations alone,
?	more recently, compare entire genomes, which permits the study of more complex evolutionary events, such as gene duplication, horizontal gene transfer, and the prediction of factors important in bacterial speciation,
?	build complex computational models of populations to predict the outcome of the system over time
?	track and share information on an increasingly large number of species and organisms
Future work endeavours to reconstruct the now more complex tree of life.
The area of research within computer science that uses genetic algorithms is sometimes confused with computational evolutionary biology, but the two areas are not necessarily related.
[edit]Literature analysis
Main article: Text mining
The growth in the number of published literature makes it virtually impossible to read every paper, resulting in disjointed subfields of research. Literature analysis aims to employ computational and statistical linguistics to mine this growing library of text resources. For example:
?	abbreviation recognition - identify the long-form and abbreviation of biological terms,
?	named entity recognition - recognizing biological terms such as gene names
?	protein-protein interaction - identify which proteins interact with which proteins from text
The area of research uses statistics and computational linguistics, and is substantially influenced by them.
[edit]Analysis of gene expression
Since the Phage ?-X174 was sequenced in 1977,[3] the DNA sequences of thousands of organisms have been decoded and stored in databases. This sequence information is analyzed to determine genes that encode polypeptides (proteins), RNA genes, regulatory sequences, structural motifs, and repetitive sequences. A comparison of genes within a species or between different species can show similarities between protein functions, or relations between species (the use of molecular systematics to construct phylogenetic trees). With the growing amount of data, it long ago became impractical to analyze DNA sequences manually. Today, computer programs such as BLAST are used daily to search sequences from more than 260 000 organisms, containing over 190 billionnucleotides.[4] These programs can compensate for mutations (exchanged, deleted or inserted bases) in the DNA sequence, to identify sequences that are related, but not identical. A variant of thissequence alignment is used in the sequencing process itself. The so-called shotgun sequencing technique (which was used, for example, by The Institute for Genomic Research to sequence the first bacterial genome, Haemophilus influenzae)[5] does not produce entire chromosomes, but instead generates the sequences of many thousands of small DNA fragments (ranging from 35 to 900 nucleotides long, depending on the sequencing technology). The ends of these fragments overlap and, when aligned properly by a genome assembly program, can be used to reconstruct the complete genome. Shotgun sequencing yields sequence data quickly, but the task of assembling the fragments can be quite complicated for larger genomes. For a genome as large as the human genome, it may take many days of CPU time on large-memory, multiprocessor computers to assemble the f Evolutionary biology is the study of the origin and descent of species, as well as their change over time. Informatics has assisted evolutionary biologists in several key ways; it has enabled researchers to:
?	trace the evolution of a large number of organisms by measuring changes in their DNA, rather than through physical taxonomy or physiological observations alone,
?	more recently, compare entire genomes, which permits the study of more complex evolutionary events, such as gene duplication, horizontal gene transfer, and the prediction of factors important in bacterial speciation,
?	build complex computational models of populations to predict the outcome of the system over time
?	track and share information on an increasingly large number of species and organisms
Future work endeavours to reconstruct the now more complex tree of life.
The area of research within computer science that uses genetic algorithms is sometimes confused with computational evolutionary biology, but the two areas are not necessarily related.
[edit]Literature analysis
Main article: Text mining
The growth in the number of published literature makes it virtually impossible to read every paper, resulting in disjointed subfields of research. Literature analysis aims to employ computational and statistical linguistics to mine this growing library of text resources. For example:
?	abbreviation recognition - identify the long-form and abbreviation of biological terms,
?	named entity recognition - recognizing biological terms such as gene names
?	protein-protein interaction - identify which proteins interact with which proteins from text
The area of research uses statistics and computational linguistics, and is substantially influenced by them.
[edit]Analysis of gene expression
The expression of many genes can be determined by measuring mRNA levels with multiple techniques including microarrays, expressed cDNA sequence tag (EST) sequencing, serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) tag sequencing, massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS), RNA-Seq, also known as "Whole Transcriptome Shotgun Sequencing" (WTSS), or various applications of multiplexed in-situ hybridization. All of these techniques are extremely noise-prone and/or subject to bias in the biological measurement, and a major research area in computational biology involves developing statistical tools to separate signal from noise in high-throughput gene expression studies. Such studies are often used to determine the genes implicated in a disorder: one might compare microarray data from cancerous epithelial cells to data from non-cancerous cells to determine the transcripts that are up-regulated and down-regulated in a particular population of cancer cells.
[edit]Analysis of regulation
Regulation is the complex orchestration of events starting with an extracellular signal such as a hormone and leading to an increase or decrease in the activity of one or more proteins. Bioinformatics techniques have been applied to explore various steps in this process. For example, promoter analysis involves the identification and study of sequence motifs in the DNA surrounding the coding region of a gene. These motifs influence the extent to which that region is transcribed into mRNA. Expression data can be used to infer gene regulation: one might compare microarray data from a wide variety of states of an organism to form hypotheses about the genes involved in each state. In a single-cell organism, one might compare stages of the cell cycle, along with various stress conditions (heat shock, starvation, etc.). One can then apply clustering algorithms to that expression data to determine which genes are co-expressed. For example, the upstream regions (promoters) of co-expressed genes can be searched for over-represented regulatory elements.
[edit]Analysis of protein expression
Protein microarrays and high throughput (HT) mass spectrometry (MS) can provide a snapshot of the proteins present in a biological sample. Bioinformatics is very much involved in making sense of protein microarray and HT MS data; the former approach faces similar problems as with microarrays targeted at mRNA, the latter involves the problem of matching large amounts of mass data against predicted masses from protein sequence databases, and the complicated statistical analysis of samples where multiple, but incomplete peptides from each protein are detected.
[edit]Analysis of mutations in cancer
In cancer, the genomes of affected cells are rearranged in complex or even unpredictable ways. Massive sequencing efforts are used to identify previously unknown point mutations in a variety of genesin cancer. Bioinformaticians continue to produce specialized automated systems to manage the sheer volume of sequence data produced, and they create new algorithms and software to compare the sequencing results to the growing collection of human genome sequences and germline polymorphisms. New physical detection technologies are employed, such as oligonucleotide microarrays to identify chromosomal gains and losses (called comparative genomic hybridization), and single-nucleotide polymorphism arrays to detect known point mutations. These detection methods simultaneously measure several hundred thousand sites throughout the genome, and when used in high-throughput to measure thousands of samples, generate terabytes of data per experiment. Again the massive amounts and new types of data generate new opportunities for bioinformaticians. The data is often found to contain considerable variability, or noise, and thus Hidden Markov model and change-point analysis methods are being developed to infer real copy number changes.
Another type of data that requires novel informatics development is the analysis of lesions found to be recurrent among many tumors .
[edit]Comparative genomics
Main article: Comparative genomics
The core of comparative genome analysis is the establishment of the correspondence between genes (orthology analysis) or other genomic features in different organisms. It is these intergenomic maps that make it possible to trace the evolutionary processes responsible for the divergence of two genomes. A multitude of evolutionary events acting at various organizational levels shape genome evolution. At the lowest level, point mutations affect individual nucleotides. At a higher level, large chromosomal segments undergo duplication, lateral transfer, inversion, transposition, deletion and insertion. Ultimately, whole genomes are involved in processes of hybridization, polyploidization and endosymbiosis, often leading to rapid speciation. The complexity of genome evolution poses many exciting challenges to developers of mathematical models and algorithms, who have recourse to a spectra of algorithmic, statistical and mathematical techniques, ranging from exact, heuristics, fixed parameter and approximation algorithms for problems based on parsimony models to Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithms for Bayesian analysis of problems based on probabilistic models.
Many of these studies are based on the homology detection and protein families computation.
[edit]Modeling biological systems
Main article: Computational systems biology
Systems biology involves the use of computer simulations of cellular subsystems (such as the networks of metabolites and enzymes which comprise metabolism, signal transduction pathways andgene regulatory networks) to both analyze and visualize the complex connections of these cellular processes. Artificial life or virtual evolution attempts to understand evolutionary processes via the computer simulation of simple (artificial) life forms.
[edit]High-throughput image analysis
Computational technologies are used to accelerate or fully automate the processing, quantification and analysis of large amounts of high-information-content biomedical imagery. Modern image analysis systems augment an observer's ability to make measurements from a large or complex set of images, by improving accuracy, objectivity, or speed. A fully developed analysis system may completely replace the observer. Although these systems are not unique to biomedical imagery, biomedical imaging is becoming more important for both diagnostics and research. Some examples are:
?	high-throughput and high-fidelity quantification and sub-cellular localization (high-content screening, cytohistopathology, Bioimage informatics)
?	morphometrics
?	clinical image analysis and visualization
?	determining the real-time air-flow patterns in breathing lungs of living animals
?	quantifying occlusion size in real-time imagery from the development of and recovery during arterial injury
?	making behavioral observations from extended video recordings of laboratory animals
?	infrared measurements for metabolic activity determination
?	inferring clone overlaps in DNA mapping, e.g. the Sulston score
[edit]Structural Bioinformatic Approaches
[edit]Prediction of protein structure
Main article: Protein structure prediction
Protein structure prediction is another important application of bioinformatics. The amino acid sequence of a protein, the so-called primary structure, can be easily determined from the sequence on the gene that codes for it. In the vast majority of cases, this primary structure uniquely determines a structure in its native environment. (Of course, there are exceptions, such as the bovine spongiform encephalopathy – a.k.a. Mad Cow Disease – prion.) Knowledge of this structure is vital in understanding the function of the protein. For lack of better terms, structural information is usually classified as one of secondary, tertiary and quaternary structure. A viable general solution to such predictions remains an open problem. As of now, most efforts have been directed towards heuristics that work most of the time.
One of the key ideas in bioinformatics is the notion of homology. In the genomic branch of bioinformatics, homology is used to predict the function of a gene: if the sequence of gene A, whose function is known, is homologous to the sequence of gene B, whose function is unknown, one could infer that B may share A's function. In the structural branch of bioinformatics, homology is used to determine which parts of a protein are important in structure formation and interaction with other proteins. In a technique called homology modeling, this information is used to predict the structure of a protein once the structure of a homologous protein is known. This currently remains the only way to predict protein structures reliably.
One example of this is the similar protein homology between hemoglobin in humans and the hemoglobin in legumes (leghemoglobin). Both serve the same purpose of transporting oxygen in the organism. Though both of these proteins have completely different amino acid sequences, their protein structures are virtually identical, which reflects their near identical purposes.
Other techniques for predicting protein structure include protein threading and de novo (from scratch) physics-based modeling.
See also: structural motif and structural domain.
[edit]Molecular Interaction
Efficient software is available today for studying interactions among proteins, ligands and peptides. Types of interactions most often encountered in the field include – Protein–ligand (including drug), protein–protein and protein–peptide.
Molecular dynamic simulation of movement of atoms about rotatable bonds is the fundamental principle behind computational algorithms, termed docking algorithms for studying molecular interactions.
See also: protein–protein interaction prediction.
[edit]Docking algorithms
Main article: Protein–protein docking
In the last two decades, tens of thousands of protein three-dimensional structures have been determined by X-ray crystallography and Protein nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (protein NMR). One central question for the biological scientist is whether it is practical to predict possible protein–protein interactions only based on these 3D shapes, without doing protein–protein interactionexperiments. A variety of methods have been developed to tackle the Protein–protein docking problem, though it seems that there is still much work to be done in this field.
[edit]Software and tools
Software tools for bioinformatics range from simple command-line tools, to more complex graphical programs and standalone web-services available from various bioinformatics companies or public institutions.
[edit]Open source bioinformatics software
Many free and open source software tools have existed and continued to grow since the 1980s.[6] The combination of a continued need for new algorithms for the analysis of emerging types of biological readouts, the potential for innovative in silico experiments, and freely available open code bases have helped to create opportunities for all research groups to contribute to both bioinformatics and the range of open source software available, regardless of their funding arrangements. The open source tools often act as incubators of ideas, or community-supported plug-ins in commercial applications. They may also provide de facto standards and shared object models for assisting with the challenge of bioinformation integration.
The range of open source software packages includes titles such as Bioconductor, BioPerl, BioJava, Bioclipse, EMBOSS, Taverna workbench, and UGENE. In order to maintain this tradition and create further opportunities, the non-profit Open Bioinformatics Foundation[6] have supported the annual Bioinformatics Open Source Conference (BOSC) since 2000.[7]
[edit]Web services in bioinformatics
SOAP and REST-based interfaces have been developed for a wide variety of bioinformatics applications allowing an application running on one computer in one part of the world to use algorithms, data and computing resources on servers in other parts of the world. The main advantages derive from the fact that end users do not have to deal with software and database maintenance overheads.
Basic bioinformatics services are classified by the EBI into three categories: SSS (Sequence Search Services), MSA (Multiple Sequence Alignment) and BSA (Biological Sequence Analysis). The availability of these service-oriented bioinformatics resources demonstrate the applicability of web based bioinformatics solutions, and range from a collection of standalone tools with a common data format under a single, standalone or web-based interface, to integrative, distributed and extensible bioinformatics workflow management systems.
The iPhone (pronounced /'a?fo?n/ EYE-fone) is a line of Internet- and multimedia-enabled smartphones designed and marketed by Apple Inc. The first iPhone was unveiled by Apple CEO Steve Jobs on January 9, 2007,[1] and released on June 29, 2007.
An iPhone can function as a video camera (video recording was not a standard feature until the iPhone 3GS was released), a camera phone, can send textsand receive visual voicemail, a portable media player, and an Internet client with email and web browsing capabilities, and both Wi-Fi and 3G connectivity. Theuser interface is built around the device's multi-touch screen, including a virtual keyboard rather than a physical one. Third-party as well as Apple application software is available from the App Store, which launched in mid-2008 and now has over 425,000[2] "apps" approved by Apple. These apps have diverse functionalities, including games, reference, GPS navigation, social networking, security and advertising for television shows, films, and celebrities.
There are four generations of iPhone models, each accompanied by one of the four major releases of iOS (formerly iPhone OS). The original iPhone was aGSM phone that established design precedents like screen size and button placement that have persisted through all models. The iPhone 3G added 3Gcellular network capabilities and A-GPS location. The iPhone 3GS added a compass, faster processor, and higher resolution camera, including video recording at 480p. The iPhone 4 has a rear facing camera (720p video) and a front facing camera (at a lower resolution) for FaceTime video calling and for use in other apps like Skype. The phone also featured a higher-resolution display; it was released on June 24, 2010. In the U.S., AT&T was the only authorized carrier until February 10, 2011, when a CDMA version of the iPhone 4 launched for Verizon.
he bottom of the iPhone sports a speaker (left) and a microphone (right) flanking the dock connector. One loudspeaker is located above the screen as an earpiece, and another is located on the left side of the bottom of the unit, opposite a microphone on the bottom-right. The iPhone 4 includes an additional microphone at the top of the unit for noise cancellation, and switches the placement of the microphone and speaker on the base on the unit—the speaker is on the right.[44] Volume controls are located on the left side of all iPhone models and as a slider in the iPod application.
The 3.5 mm TRRS connector for the headphones is located on the top left corner of the device.[45] The headphone socket on the original iPhone is recessed into the casing, making it incompatible with most headsets without the use of an adapter.[46][47] Subsequent generations eliminated the issue by using a flush-mounted headphone socket. Cars equipped with an auxiliary jack allow for handsfree use of the iPhone while driving as a substitute for Bluetooth.
While the iPhone is compatible with normal headphones, Apple provides a headset with additional functionality. A multipurpose button near the microphone can be used to play or pause music, skip tracks, and answer or end phone calls without touching the iPhone. A small number of third-party headsets specifically designed for the iPhone also include the microphone and control button.[48] The current headsets also provide volume controls, which are only compatible with more recent models.[49] These features are achieved by a fourth ring in the audio jack that carries this extra information.
The built-in Bluetooth 2.x+EDR supports wireless earpieces and headphones, which requires the HSP profile. Stereo audio was added in the 3.0 update for hardware that supports A2DP.[39][40] While non-sanctioned third-party solutions exist, the iPhone does not officially support the OBEX file transfer protocol.[50] The lack of these profiles prevents iPhone users from exchanging multimedia files, such as pictures, music and videos, with other bluetooth-enabled cell phones.
Composite or component video at up to 576i and stereo audio can be output from the dock connector using an adapter sold by Apple.[51] iPhone 4 also supports 1024x768 VGA output via a dock adapter. The iPhone did not support voice recording until the 3.0 software update.[39][40]
[edit]Battery
The iPhone is equipped with liquid contact indicators which change from white to red in color when they come in contact with water. These suggest whether water damage has affected the device. The indicators on the iPhone include a small disc which is located at the bottom of the headphone jack and with the iPhone 3G and all later models an additional one is located at the bottom of the dock connector.[75] The indicators are often used by Apple employees to determine whether the device qualifies for a warranty repair or replacement. If the indicators show that the device was exposed to water, they may determine that the device is not covered by Apple. However, the liquid contact indicators may be triggered through routine use, and if a device is worn while exercising, the sweat from an owner may dampen the indicators enough to indicate water damage.[76] On many other mobile phones from different manufacturers, the liquid contact indicators are located in a protected location, such as beneath the battery behind a battery cover, but the indicators on an iPhone are directly exposed to the environment. This has led to criticism of the placement of the indicators, which may also be affected by steam in a bathroom or other light environmental moisture.[77] In response to these criticisms, Apple made a silent change to their water damage policy for iPhones and similar products. This new policy allows the customer to request further internal inspection of the phone to verify if internal liquid damage sensors were triggered.[78] The interface is based around the home screen, a graphical list of available applications. iPhone applications normally run one at a time (not including iOS 4, which includes running applications in the background[102]), although most functionality is still available when making a call or listening to music. The home screen can be accessed at any time by a hardware button below the screen, closing the open application in the process.[103] By default, the Home screen contains the following icons: Messages (SMS and MMS messaging), Calendar, Photos, Camera, YouTube, Stocks, Maps (Google Maps), Weather, Voice Memos, Notes, Clock, Calculator, Settings, iTunes (store), App Store, and (on the iPhone 3GS and iPhone 4) Compass. Docked at the base of the screen, four icons for Phone, Mail, Safari(Internet), and iPod (multimedia) delineate the iPhone's main purposes.[104] On January 15, 2008, Apple released software update 1.1.3, allowing users to create "Web Clips", home screen icons that resemble apps that open a user-defined page in Safari. After the update, iPhone users can rearrange and place icons on up to nine other adjacent home screens, accessed by a horizontal swipe.[41] Users can also add and delete icons from the dock, which is the same on every home screen. Each home screen holds up to sixteen icons, and the dock holds up to four icons. Users can delete Web Clips and third-party applications at any time, and may select only certain applications for transfer from iTunes. Apple's default programs, however, may not be removed. The 3.0 update adds a system-wide search, known as Spotlight, to the left of the first home screen.[39][40]
Almost all input is given through the touch screen, which understands complex gestures using multi-touch. The iPhone's interaction techniques enable the user to move the content up or down by a touch-drag motion of the finger. For example, zooming in and out of web pages and photos is done by placing two fingers on the screen and spreading them farther apart or bringing them closer together, a gesture known as "pinching". Scrolling through a long list or menu is achieved by sliding a finger over the display from bottom to top, or vice versa to go back. In either case, the list moves as if it is pasted on the outer surface of a wheel, slowly decelerating as if affected by friction. In this way, the interface simulates the physics of a real object. Other user-centered interactive effects include horizontally sliding sub-selection, the vertically sliding keyboard and bookmarks menu, and widgets that turn around to allow settings to be configured on the other side. Menu bars are found at the top and bottom of the screen when necessary. Their options vary by program, but always follow a consistent style motif. In menu hierarchies, a "back" button in the top-left corner of the screen displays the name of the parent folder.
[edit]Phone
 
 
When making a call, the iPhone presents a number of options, including FaceTime on supported models. The screen isautomatically disabled when held close to the face.
The iPhone allows audio conferencing, call holding, call merging, caller ID, and integration with other cellular network features and iPhone functions. For example, if music is playing when a call is received, the music fades out, and fades back in when the call has ended. The proximity sensor shuts off the screen and touch-sensitive circuitry when the iPhone is brought close to the face, both to save battery and prevent unintentional touches. The iPhone does not support video calling orvideoconferencing on versions prior to the fourth generation, as there is only one camera on the opposite side of the screen.[105] The iPhone 4 supports video calling using either the front or back camera over Wi-Fi, a feature Apple calls FaceTime.[106] The first two models only support voice dialing through third-party applications.[107] Voice control, available only on the iPhone 3GS and iPhone 4, allows users to say a contact's name or number and the iPhone will dial.[108]
The iPhone includes a visual voicemail (in some countries)[109] feature allowing users to view a list of current voicemail messages on-screen without having to call into their voicemail. Unlike most other systems, messages can be listened to and deleted in a non-chronological order by choosing any message from an on-screen list.
A music ringtone feature was introduced in the United States on September 5, 2007. Users can create custom ringtones from songs purchased from the iTunes Store for a small additional fee. The ringtones can be 3 to 30 seconds long from any part of a song, can fade in and out, pause from half a second to five seconds when looped, or loop continuously. All customizing can be done in iTunes,[110] or alternatively with Apple's GarageBand software 4.1.1 or later (available only on Mac OS X)[111] or third-party tools.[112]
[edit]Multimedia
 
 
The photo display application supports both portrait and landscape orientations.
The layout of the music library is similar to that of an iPod or current Symbian S60 phones. The iPhone can sort its media library by songs, artists, albums, videos, playlists, genres, composers, podcasts, audiobooks, and compilations. Options are always presented alphabetically, except in playlists, which retain their order from iTunes. The iPhone uses a large font that allows users plenty of room to touch their selection. Users can rotate their device horizontally to landscape mode to access Cover Flow. Like on iTunes, this feature shows the different album covers in a scroll-through photo library. Scrolling is achieved by swiping a finger across the screen. Alternatively, headset controls can be used to pause, play, skip, and repeat tracks. On the iPhone 3GS, the volume can be changed with the included Apple Earphones, and the Voice Control feature can be used to identify a track, play songs in a playlist or by a specific artist, or create a Genius playlist.[108]
The iPhone supports gapless playback.[113] Like the fifth-generation iPods introduced in 2005, the iPhone can play digital video, allowing users to watch TV shows and movies in widescreen. Double-tapping switches between widescreen and fullscreen video playback.
The iPhone allows users to purchase and download songs from the iTunes Store directly to their iPhone. The feature originally required a Wi-Fi network, but now[when?] can use the cellular data network if one is not available.[114]
The iPhone includes software that allows the user to upload, view, and e-mail photos taken with the camera. The user zooms in and out of photos by sliding two fingers further apart or closer together, much like Safari. The Camera application also lets users view the camera roll, the pictures that have been taken with the iPhone's camera. Those pictures are also available in the Photos application, along with any transferred from iPhoto or Aperture on a Mac, or Photoshop on a Windows PC.
[edit]Internet connectivity
 
 
Wikipedia Main Page on the iPhone'sSafari web browser in landscape mode
Internet access is available when the iPhone is connected to a local area Wi-Fi or a wide area GSM or EDGE network, both second-generation (2G) wireless data standards. The iPhone 3G introduced support for third-generation UMTS and HSDPA 3.6,[115] but not HSUPA networks, and only the iPhone 3GS and iPhone 4 support HSDPA 7.2.[116] AT&T introduced 3G in July 2004,[117] but as late as 2007, Steve Jobs stated that it was still not widespread enough in the US, and the chipsets not energy efficient enough, to be included in the iPhone.[33][118] Support for 802.1X, an authentication system commonly used by university and corporate Wi-Fi networks, was added in the 2.0 version update.[119]
By default, the iPhone will ask to join newly discovered Wi-Fi networks and prompt for the password when required. Alternatively, it can join closed Wi-Fi networks manually.[120] The iPhone will automatically choose the strongest network, connecting to Wi-Fi instead of EDGE when it is available.[121] Similarly, the iPhone 3G, 3GS and 4 prefer 3G to 2G, and Wi-Fi to either.[122] Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and 3G (on the iPhone 3G, 3GS, and 4) can all be deactivated individually. Airplane mode disables all wireless connections at once, overriding other preferences. However, once in Airplane mode, one can explicitly enable Wi-Fi and/or Bluetooth modes to join and continue to operate over one or both of those networks while the cellular network transceivers remain off.
The iPhone 3GS has a maximum download rate of 7.2 Mbit/s.[123] Furthermore, files downloaded over cellular networks must be smaller than 20 MB.[124]Larger files, often email attachments or podcasts, must be downloaded over Wi-Fi (which has no file size limits). If Wi-Fi is unavailable, one workaround is to open the files directly in Safari.[125]
Safari is the iPhone's native web browser, and it displays pages similar to its Mac and Windows counterparts. Web pages may be viewed in portrait or landscape mode and supports automatic zooming by pinching together or spreading apart fingertips on the screen, or by double-tapping text or images.[126][127] The iPhone supports neither Flash[128] nor Java.[129][unreliable source?] Consequently, theUK's Advertising Standards Authority adjudicated that an advertisement claiming the iPhone could access "all parts of the internet" should be withdrawn in its current form, on grounds of false advertising.[130] In a rare public letter in April 2010, Apple CEO Steve Jobs outlined the reasoning behind the absence of Flash on the iPhone (and iPad).[131] The iPhone supports SVG, CSS, HTMLCanvas, and Bonjour.[132][133]
The maps application can access Google Maps in map, satellite, or hybrid form. It can also generate directions between two locations, while providing optional real-time traffic information. During the iPhone's announcement, Jobs demonstrated this feature by searching for nearby Starbucks locations and then placing a prank call to one with a single tap.[3][134] Support for walking directions, public transit, and street view was added in the version 2.2 software update, but no voice-guided navigation.[135] The iPhone 3GS and iPhone 4 can orient the map with its digital compass.[43] Apple also developed a separate application to view YouTube videos on the iPhone, which streams videos after encoding them using the H.264 codec. Simple weather and stock quotes applications also tap in to the Internet.
iPhone users can and do access the Internet frequently, and in a variety of places. According to Google, in 2008, the iPhone generated 50 times more search requests than any other mobile handset.[136] According to Deutsche Telekom CEO René Obermann, "The average Internet usage for an iPhone customer is more than 100 megabytes. This is 30 times the use for our average contract-based consumer customers."[137] Nielsen found that 98% of iPhone users use data services, and 88% use the internet.[13] In China, the iPhone 3G and iPhone 3GS were built and distributed without Wi-fi.[138]
With the introduction of the Verizon iPhone in January 2011, the issue of using internet while on the phone has been brought to the public's attention. Under the two US carriers, internet and phone could be used simultaneously on ATT networks, whereas the Verizon networks only support for the use of each separately.[139]
[edit]Text input
 
 
The virtual keyboard on the original iPhone's touchscreen.
For text input, the iPhone implements a virtual keyboard on the touchscreen. It has automatic spell checking and correction, predictive word capabilities, and a dynamic dictionary that learns new words. The keyboard can predict what word the user is typing and complete it, and correct for the accidental pressing of keys near the presumed desired key.[140] The keys are somewhat larger and spaced farther apart when in landscape mode, which is supported by only a limited number of applications. Touching a section of text for a brief time brings up a magnifying glass, allowing users to place the cursor in the middle of existing text. The virtual keyboard can accommodate 21 languages, including character recognition for Chinese.[141] The 3.0 update brought support for cut, copy, or pasting text, as well as landscape keyboards in more applications.[39][40]
[edit]E-mail and text messages
The iPhone also features an e-mail program that supports HTML e-mail, which enables the user to embed photos in an e-mail message. PDF, Word, Excel, and Powerpoint attachments to mail messages can be viewed on the phone.[142] Apple's MobileMe platform offers push email, which emulates the functionality of the popular BlackBerry email solution, for an annual subscription. Yahoo! offers a free push-email service for the iPhone. IMAP (although notPush-IMAP) and POP3 mail standards are also supported, including Microsoft Exchange[143] and Kerio Connect.[144] In the first versions of the iPhone firmware, this was accomplished by opening up IMAP on the Exchange server. Apple has also licensed Microsoft ActiveSync and now[when?] supports the platform (including push email) with the release of iPhone 2.0 firmware.[145][146] The iPhone will sync e-mail account settings over from Apple's own Mailapplication, Microsoft Outlook, and Microsoft Entourage, or it can be manually configured on the device itself. With the correct settings, the e-mail program can access almost any IMAP or POP3 account.[147]
Text messages are presented chronologically in a mailbox format similar to Mail, which places all text from recipients together with replies. Text messages are displayed in speech bubbles (similar toiChat) under each recipient's name. The iPhone has built-in support for e-mail message forwarding, drafts, 
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Praesent ante dolor, tincidunt at blandit ut, tincidunt eu dolor. Mauris aliquam blandit aliquet. Phasellus nec neque ut augue aliquet iaculis sit amet et sapien. Fusce dignissim congue velit vitae sagittis. Aenean fermentum lorem quis orci convallis quis volutpat enim pretium. Donec pretium hendrerit accumsan. Mauris ac justo urna. In mi felis, dignissim vel blandit id, placerat eget sem. Etiam quis augue sapien. Vestibulum vitae euismod massa. Proin dignissim libero nec mauris fermentum ut rhoncus justo lobortis. Quisque facilisis volutpat neque, non tristique libero fringilla et. Mauris et dui at lorem ultrices bibendum nec vel mauris. Fusce lacus ante, mattis et adipiscing vel, vestibulum vel urna. Aliquam leo nisi, vestibulum nec placerat accumsan, rhoncus a lacus. Curabitur luctus fermentum magna, eu euismod ante volutpat a.
Duis fringilla, erat congue vestibulum scelerisque, nibh enim lobortis libero, ac tincidunt nunc sapien ac tellus. Proin in lorem ante. Praesent felis ipsum, ornare at congue sit amet, gravida quis enim. Nullam vel egestas nisl. In vel tincidunt nisl. Maecenas vitae ante lorem, vel aliquam est. Pellentesque sapien sem, dictum a faucibus ac, feugiat in turpis. Proin mollis dui et enim vulputate sodales. Nullam gravida tempor tortor id varius. Morbi urna sem, varius id interdum at, pellentesque molestie arcu. Morbi lectus lacus, laoreet nec vehicula quis, elementum ac leo. Sed eget lacus et tellus placerat hendrerit. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Quisque dictum congue arcu ac rhoncus. In ultrices cursus ipsum at facilisis.
Aliquam mattis, sem at cursus euismod, magna magna ultrices odio, eu mattis sapien nisi vel risus. Donec condimentum imperdiet feugiat. Maecenas dictum tempor dui eu posuere. Integer tempor tempor libero, vel fermentum urna sodales vitae. Nulla facilisi. Ut a nulla arcu. Nunc vulputate nulla ut ipsum tempor laoreet. Nulla facilisi. Donec quis tellus at libero hendrerit aliquam. Donec tortor sapien, iaculis in tincidunt et, pulvinar ac mauris. Donec in neque eros, a malesuada sapien. Sed et erat nisi, quis vehicula nulla. Mauris lobortis, est eu fringilla pulvinar, turpis massa vestibulum ipsum, nec ultrices arcu tortor id justo. In fermentum eros in ligula rhoncus nec hendrerit nulla bibendum. Nunc felis massa, accumsan in consectetur non, mattis non nisi. Suspendisse enim risus, lacinia ac consectetur mollis, eleifend aliquet ipsum. Nam est orci, accumsan in interdum id, tempus sed nulla. Ut lacinia sem vitae nisi aliquam volutpat. Duis id ipsum et nisi lacinia euismod vitae a augue.
Aenean imperdiet lectus ipsum. In a quam augue. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Integer libero mauris, tristique posuere placerat vel, eleifend et orci. Curabitur vel ullamcorper lacus. Fusce sollicitudin, augue sed varius ornare, turpis nisl ultrices arcu, sed luctus nulla lacus vitae elit. Donec lorem eros, rhoncus nec suscipit eget, porttitor at turpis. Donec vehicula metus purus, facilisis tempus tellus. Nam dictum laoreet vulputate. Quisque accumsan tincidunt facilisis. Aliquam erat volutpat. Vivamus a metus odio, eu fermentum sapien. Aliquam erat volutpat. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Donec tincidunt, neque nec accumsan feugiat, risus est accumsan tortor, sed rutrum quam orci ut sem.
Ut tincidunt hendrerit justo, a tristique libero feugiat ac. Morbi pharetra massa id tortor consectetur vel adipiscing dui pellentesque. Cras fringilla lorem ut sapien laoreet vulputate. Vestibulum pulvinar porttitor consectetur. Cras malesuada sapien convallis nibh scelerisque placerat. Cras odio quam, luctus pulvinar malesuada ac, sagittis eu ligula. Integer ac felis eu quam ultricies rhoncus vitae et neque. Aliquam facilisis est lacinia magna congue ut tristique nisi faucibus. Morbi urna velit, convallis ut elementum id, laoreet quis urna. Curabitur sapien est, tempor vitae euismod nec, bibendum viverra metus. Fusce vel dui odio. Pellentesque eget malesuada lectus. Aenean fringilla ligula a nisi condimentum et pellentesque nulla lobortis. Suspendisse potenti. Vestibulum a lacus nibh, sit amet aliquam arcu. Aliquam commodo orci vitae odio tempus rutrum pulvinar nulla egestas.
Maecenas dapibus sagittis ornare. Duis metus quam, rutrum sit amet suscipit vel, pharetra quis turpis. Ut massa elit, rutrum pharetra euismod vel, fringilla sed lectus. Curabitur viverra arcu a libero convallis eget scelerisque eros fringilla. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Aliquam condimentum tellus at justo tempor egestas. Sed neque ante, scelerisque vitae commodo a, semper id elit. Quisque in erat ac massa volutpat ultrices. Nullam sit amet enim vitae risus sodales tempus. Suspendisse cursus tempus neque eget laoreet. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Curabitur ultrices augue quis justo venenatis vel euismod turpis commodo. Aenean porttitor pretium feugiat. Phasellus fermentum, neque at accumsan lacinia, tortor risus consequat diam, in porttitor ante quam non quam. Etiam non lorem ut lorem rhoncus laoreet. Curabitur odio leo, pulvinar sed commodo vitae, tempor quis leo. Mauris mauris ante, scelerisque at laoreet eu, aliquet suscipit felis. Pellentesque tempus nunc a justo congue non gravida libero pellentesque. Vestibulum vehicula, lorem nec ultrices rutrum, nisi tortor posuere augue, eu rutrum sapien orci non risus.
Donec id lacus arcu, et venenatis velit. Nunc rhoncus scelerisque pellentesque. Proin sollicitudin metus viverra neque feugiat gravida. Sed in tortor ac sem rutrum porttitor. Nullam suscipit elementum sagittis. Aliquam turpis augue, posuere ac malesuada ut, sagittis nec odio. In placerat adipiscing massa, et eleifend mauris placerat sit amet. Fusce ac placerat justo. Aliquam euismod lectus id mauris malesuada pellentesque. Nam sodales turpis in felis tempor vestibulum. Aenean lacus ante, semper ut viverra in, tempus et dolor. Quisque auctor tempor eros, eu convallis eros pulvinar a. Morbi elit sapien, eleifend tempor molestie ac, aliquet ut dui. Quisque lorem ante, pharetra ac posuere et, vestibulum id metus. Pellentesque ut leo velit. In euismod, orci eu lacinia facilisis, elit mauris sodales risus, ut tristique justo lorem at justo. Nunc tincidunt felis id ante commodo consectetur. Proin sit amet tincidunt dolor.
Donec varius tincidunt arcu non mollis. Nam commodo arcu ac libero auctor ac gravida eros tempus. Cras ipsum dui, feugiat vel bibendum sed, suscipit eget nisl. Quisque vitae eros arcu. Sed vel quam dolor. Proin ultricies metus nec orci tincidunt sagittis. Duis neque lacus, sagittis at bibendum at, sodales luctus nulla. Donec id mauris ligula. Mauris dapibus magna eget mi pharetra non viverra justo pharetra. Vivamus commodo pharetra est, vel gravida ligula lacinia at. Etiam in dolor eget tellus porta tristique quis ac velit. Vestibulum nisi odio, mollis non elementum aliquam, sagittis non orci. Aenean ut augue quis nunc rhoncus gravida. Pellentesque eget enim auctor sem tempor bibendum. Quisque vel suscipit arcu. Integer odio massa, pulvinar eget viverra cursus, lobortis sit amet quam. Sed eros nulla, elementum eget porttitor vel, vestibulum vitae diam. Vivamus sodales aliquam libero eu varius.
Duis sit amet purus ac enim semper semper vel id nisi. Fusce fringilla viverra condimentum. Integer semper ante quis purus posuere ut interdum mauris mattis. Vivamus id consectetur ante. Nulla cursus vulputate urna ac faucibus. Nunc blandit imperdiet posuere. In auctor lobortis eleifend. Donec ante mauris, iaculis id feugiat eu, tincidunt et lectus. Phasellus nunc nulla, fringilla sit amet ultrices et, posuere quis eros. Praesent ut urna lacus. Nulla mollis nisl in justo congue vestibulum. Etiam pellentesque, ipsum in suscipit tincidunt, odio tellus faucibus nisi, sit amet scelerisque tortor velit ut nibh. Fusce convallis condimentum euismod. Vivamus feugiat tempor lorem, vitae commodo sem viverra ut. Etiam vitae purus leo, vitae feugiat turpis. Aliquam erat volutpat. Donec urna lacus, egestas sit amet condimentum eu, ultricies mollis massa. Duis nibh risus, blandit in facilisis nec, hendrerit vel lacus. Mauris id condimentum leo.
Sed ut pulvinar ante. Etiam pulvinar sollicitudin turpis, quis ullamcorper nulla mollis varius. Duis quis urna quam, non gravida justo. Donec vestibulum aliquam ultrices. Praesent quis nibh odio, id fringilla nibh. Nunc venenatis tempor arcu vitae mattis. Donec laoreet molestie augue et congue. Praesent mauris dui, dictum vitae gravida et, luctus vel metus. Ut molestie libero in purus auctor vel malesuada felis adipiscing. Proin gravida, augue et feugiat rutrum, justo magna cursus lacus, nec condimentum lorem nisi vitae nunc. Vestibulum diam mi, posuere vitae consectetur sit amet, euismod facilisis enim. Proin ut arcu augue. Nullam rutrum, dolor sed iaculis scelerisque, est lorem interdum urna, sit amet dignissim velit tortor eu mi. In elementum ullamcorper quam, a luctus massa varius a. Phasellus non massa orci. Proin dui massa, imperdiet volutpat interdum eu, dapibus a risus. Suspendisse vel laoreet nunc. Praesent mi nulla, vulputate ut dapibus ut, mollis id tellus. Phasellus vel diam vitae urna accumsan lobortis nec eu dui. In ac orci tincidunt orci porttitor ullamcorper quis id risus.
Quisque nec velit eget felis commodo tincidunt eget et nulla. Integer dignissim diam in lorem commodo auctor ac nec dolor. Pellentesque tincidunt, enim quis fermentum scelerisque, arcu lacus vulputate quam, ac posuere orci est convallis nulla. Maecenas lobortis elementum sollicitudin. Mauris ut nisi quam. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Mauris id lectus id risus lacinia suscipit in ut eros. Nam eu enim aliquet nulla scelerisque posuere. Quisque vestibulum, arcu eget suscipit posuere, elit odio ultricies magna, ac elementum erat sapien vel nulla. Curabitur condimentum turpis eu justo gravida laoreet. Praesent ut tempor elit. Aliquam lacus eros, malesuada vel molestie vel, convallis sed est. Suspendisse non tempus ligula. Pellentesque lacinia commodo dictum. Curabitur vel sem laoreet velit elementum luctus eget a nulla. Mauris nibh mauris, fermentum in scelerisque sed, euismod eget dui. Suspendisse non tellus nibh.
Integer at feugiat sem. Mauris rutrum auctor iaculis. Quisque tristique ultricies neque. Proin sit amet fermentum libero. Proin in erat eu felis tempus lacinia id eget turpis. Sed luctus lorem id nunc fermentum non dignissim dolor vehicula. Donec vulputate tincidunt diam, eget dapibus justo fringilla nec. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. Etiam placerat sem eget elit pretium euismod ac vel erat. Maecenas velit purus, lacinia in pulvinar sed, lobortis sit amet ante. Quisque magna ipsum, lobortis at aliquet ac, rhoncus at diam. Phasellus posuere condimentum libero sed lobortis. Integer a tristique justo. Aenean elementum pellentesque feugiat. Maecenas rutrum libero a mauris rutrum posuere. Nulla facilisi. Nulla quis nunc quam, sit amet pellentesque tortor. Sed quis libero in nibh pulvinar consequat.
Aenean feugiat libero at nibh dictum facilisis. Vivamus pretium porttitor sapien, non auctor mauris vulputate ac. Vestibulum eget nulla et augue ornare molestie. Nullam gravida dolor non odio cursus lacinia. Curabitur nec lorem non nulla feugiat faucibus. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Sed volutpat consectetur diam, sit amet iaculis risus varius a. Etiam eu nisl at risus pellentesque faucibus a ac tortor. Quisque nisl quam, blandit at tincidunt ac, bibendum quis ipsum. Aliquam elit ligula, lobortis sed pellentesque sit amet, accumsan et ipsum. Sed gravida bibendum nisl. Vivamus interdum ultrices lorem, vehicula ultrices risus semper sed. Etiam purus lectus, consequat eget hendrerit vel, faucibus eget orci. Maecenas ut vulputate lacus. Aenean vel justo est, sed semper ante. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae;
Nullam mollis gravida lacinia. Donec est tellus, tincidunt at pharetra sit amet, scelerisque id risus. Proin scelerisque vehicula dolor feugiat vehicula. Nulla sagittis ornare mauris, quis tristique velit sagittis non. Sed dictum tellus scelerisque risus gravida pharetra. Donec lobortis placerat ante, eget sollicitudin justo fringilla vitae. Nulla tempor, eros posuere pretium dapibus, dolor justo imperdiet arcu, sit amet condimentum magna urna id libero. Duis dapibus, leo eget interdum blandit, metus odio congue erat, malesuada feugiat risus tellus ac odio. Aliquam vestibulum lectus condimentum orci gravida ac facilisis nisl iaculis. Integer lectus lectus, fermentum eu consectetur sit amet, tristique at purus. Nam consequat enim vel sapien sodales et varius ipsum venenatis. Mauris neque nunc, aliquam ac pharetra id, dictum pharetra est.
In euismod scelerisque dolor et viverra. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Curabitur nulla risus, vestibulum ut facilisis id, feugiat eu erat. Nam luctus commodo tortor, vel ullamcorper urna iaculis et. Integer arcu ante, congue id fermentum vitae, ultricies id orci. Morbi urna ante, lacinia ut convallis ut, tempor vel tellus. Ut rutrum elit non leo laoreet porttitor eget quis turpis. Cras neque arcu, bibendum eget semper a, iaculis a quam. Sed dignissim mattis risus vitae sollicitudin. Sed quis velit et felis elementum auctor in vitae arcu. Vestibulum a felis vitae felis dapibus rutrum. Etiam id elit in enim sollicitudin pharetra. Ut ornare tellus quis mauris pretium id eleifend odio aliquam. Nullam lacinia malesuada leo sit amet viverra. Nullam congue viverra enim vel dapibus. Curabitur suscipit nibh et dolor tempor convallis.
Integer mollis feugiat posuere. Maecenas rhoncus tellus nec nulla tincidunt sed venenatis dolor bibendum. Aenean neque purus, faucibus ut imperdiet sit amet, egestas sed ante. Maecenas ac tellus vel nisi porta pellentesque id a purus. Mauris pellentesque condimentum turpis vestibulum laoreet. Aenean dictum diam ac libero volutpat eget aliquet quam vulputate. Maecenas turpis mi, pretium id rhoncus quis, fringilla ac nisl. Donec sed quam tortor. Proin eleifend felis vel orci interdum ut porta mi porttitor. Etiam laoreet fermentum orci, et iaculis mauris lobortis a. Integer malesuada orci cursus mauris pharetra auctor. Aenean ut dictum enim. Duis a ante augue. Proin risus sapien, elementum ac accumsan eget, ultrices eu leo. Ut congue volutpat ante vitae tincidunt. Vestibulum imperdiet dictum sem.
Vestibulum quis risus neque, eu mollis mi. Etiam sed rhoncus est. Nunc aliquam ullamcorper volutpat. Sed vehicula, tortor et ultrices gravida, dui tellus condimentum dolor, non ultricies mauris mauris at leo. Fusce consequat, lectus et fringilla pharetra, nisl orci ultricies sem, eu cursus odio justo non ligula. Cras non molestie ante. Vivamus sollicitudin tristique venenatis. Nunc aliquam adipiscing dui nec eleifend. Vivamus convallis porttitor egestas. Duis blandit dapibus turpis eget lobortis. Suspendisse potenti.
Aliquam ut risus arcu, vitae malesuada tellus. Donec sagittis, nibh accumsan egestas consectetur, nibh sem blandit dolor, sed ultrices urna dolor vitae mi. Quisque ac dignissim magna. Etiam iaculis, ante vel bibendum aliquam, massa nunc iaculis felis, quis iaculis dolor dui eu ligula. Nulla facilisi. Maecenas in varius nisi. Sed eu rutrum turpis. Nam bibendum sollicitudin purus a pharetra. Nam at lectus eget nisl sagittis vulputate. Duis sodales ipsum at justo iaculis gravida. Duis tempor commodo enim in euismod. Curabitur iaculis egestas lacus, non imperdiet purus posuere a. Fusce a urna pretium leo fermentum tincidunt sit amet id erat. Duis vulputate, neque nec aliquet convallis, ligula lacus bibendum mi, non dictum leo quam ut metus. Curabitur sit amet risus elit, iaculis iaculis odio. Ut vel arcu ipsum.
Fusce dignissim diam a neque dapibus vehicula. Aenean tristique, enim et convallis sagittis, ante neque gravida dolor, sit amet vulputate est mauris blandit justo. Proin non congue odio. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. Integer euismod venenatis nunc sed elementum. Praesent varius venenatis diam vehicula gravida. Nulla luctus tellus eget tellus varius venenatis. Proin vitae turpis orci. Phasellus consectetur, est vitae condimentum rutrum, lacus enim venenatis purus, ut fringilla felis erat eget orci. Morbi eget vehicula tellus. Curabitur mattis ante nec turpis luctus ultricies. Integer id est est. Praesent bibendum convallis mauris, nec molestie lorem viverra eget. Praesent tellus orci, dictum sit amet gravida vitae, pharetra eget purus.
Nullam sagittis, nulla non feugiat mattis, leo lacus egestas nibh, ut posuere ante libero quis metus. Pellentesque laoreet interdum neque vestibulum vestibulum. Aenean nec felis id mauris cursus mattis. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Ut magna arcu, pellentesque non convallis id, egestas in nulla. Morbi tempor est sed velit convallis lacinia. Aenean varius, justo ut consectetur ultrices, mauris leo tincidunt turpis, at commodo massa eros interdum urna. Cras sem dui, aliquam eu dignissim posuere, eleifend id erat. Nullam facilisis nibh sit amet urna blandit sodales. Morbi et sapien vel nunc placerat molestie. Cras varius sollicitudin neque, ac placerat metus adipiscing eget. Cras vulputate erat vel purus elementum sed malesuada leo pharetra. Aliquam diam erat, venenatis sed blandit quis, tincidunt et orci. Duis aliquet congue est, id iaculis tellus tempor vitae. Pellentesque in egestas mauris. Etiam et congue lacus. Cras consectetur dui sed erat varius sagittis a ut quam. In id mi id nunc ullamcorper vehicula eget non velit. Etiam accumsan mollis aliquet. Morbi hendrerit vestibulum purus, ut molestie risus sodales quis.
Suspendisse quis mauris magna, quis ullamcorper elit. Nullam lacus magna, adipiscing non porttitor euismod, semper id erat. Nunc pulvinar tincidunt dolor, at consequat quam dignissim nec. Nulla et augue vel tortor vehicula congue tincidunt in dui. Proin cursus metus at augue tristique tempus. Proin aliquam pellentesque odio sed iaculis. Quisque non ultrices mi. Donec leo odio, euismod et viverra at, fringilla vel augue. Aliquam condimentum tortor eu risus egestas id imperdiet ipsum malesuada. Fusce faucibus venenatis elementum. Pellentesque dui metus, ultricies non rutrum id, vulputate vel lorem. Aliquam erat volutpat. Sed volutpat sagittis felis pulvinar posuere. Etiam tellus quam, pulvinar vitae convallis quis, tristique rutrum leo. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Suspendisse nec felis tortor. Maecenas consectetur ipsum tellus.
Nulla quis felis lacus. Sed at pharetra nisl. Praesent scelerisque, est a fringilla ultricies, risus lectus sagittis lectus, et vulputate neque nunc ut magna. Suspendisse aliquam, augue eu auctor viverra, lacus mi laoreet nulla, id dignissim arcu magna non ante. Nullam egestas sollicitudin scelerisque. Proin a mauris a nisl ornare laoreet sed sit amet risus. Curabitur felis est, euismod in laoreet at, dapibus ac leo. Aenean vitae erat augue. In hendrerit lacus in nisi congue mattis. Sed eleifend rutrum fringilla. Aenean sed fermentum dolor. Donec eget vestibulum massa. Integer porta hendrerit ipsum malesuada convallis. Maecenas venenatis augue nec mi posuere eget posuere metus porta. Etiam et elit cursus nisl semper ultricies eu vel dui. Praesent vel velit ac leo imperdiet semper ut in purus. Sed mattis auctor dolor a tempor. Aenean iaculis fermentum porta. Vestibulum commodo gravida arcu vel pulvinar. Maecenas vitae nulla molestie urna rhoncus mattis id id augue.
Morbi posuere dolor et dolor ultrices volutpat ut et arcu. Suspendisse potenti. Praesent viverra sapien non sapien varius venenatis. Mauris vitae leo enim. Vivamus lacinia facilisis felis vel iaculis. Nulla nisi urna, cursus ut faucibus vestibulum, ornare sit amet justo. Nunc quis ligula vel erat dapibus porta. Aliquam sed diam a dolor tincidunt vehicula vel a purus. Donec aliquam justo ut erat iaculis aliquam. Integer nec justo massa, non pellentesque eros. Mauris eu quam turpis. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas.
Nulla consectetur eleifend massa, non aliquam nunc ornare congue. Mauris varius, urna a pretium ullamcorper, sem nulla ultricies diam, sagittis luctus dolor massa ut tellus. Fusce ante augue, porttitor ut tincidunt id, porta sed purus. Praesent semper, nulla egestas vestibulum tincidunt, nisi magna suscipit urna, eget vehicula enim est luctus enim. Donec augue augue, molestie in blandit vel, fringilla gravida arcu. Pellentesque lacus est, blandit eget pretium pharetra, convallis non felis. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Integer auctor cursus nisl non pellentesque. Phasellus nisi massa, tempor eget suscipit eget, elementum eget purus. Duis quis leo dui, quis suscipit ligula. Mauris a nunc ac ipsum molestie auctor. Aliquam erat volutpat. Praesent sit amet feugiat mi. Integer blandit magna a mauris lacinia ut ullamcorper felis consectetur. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas.
Etiam ac malesuada risus. Aliquam elit nibh, tempus at vulputate in, egestas ut urna. Suspendisse imperdiet mauris nec magna venenatis porttitor. Ut sit amet porta elit. Nunc a justo a nisi placerat venenatis. Donec tincidunt dignissim euismod. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Aliquam euismod turpis non nisi ultrices auctor. Aliquam accumsan, urna at convallis feugiat, nunc ante laoreet felis, eget suscipit mi lectus id felis. Aenean eu lectus justo. Phasellus cursus interdum purus quis consequat. Proin lectus lectus, ultricies vitae bibendum nec, tempus vitae velit. Aliquam nunc diam, porta ut auctor tempor, vulputate eu massa. Morbi sodales orci in velit dignissim eget facilisis orci ornare. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. Nullam vel sem sit amet dui suscipit adipiscing sit amet eget massa. In ac lorem eu metus aliquam rhoncus nec id lacus. Phasellus ullamcorper volutpat neque, nec pellentesque orci viverra quis. Nulla tincidunt tincidunt faucibus.
Praesent a sem dui, non adipiscing nisl. Aenean porta vulputate faucibus. Quisque adipiscing bibendum nisl. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Etiam in mi in augue eleifend interdum. Ut a lectus elit. Praesent at libero eu ante pellentesque vestibulum. Etiam imperdiet, magna a malesuada tempus, neque tortor mattis metus, at egestas eros arcu eget sapien. Aliquam mauris urna, eleifend vel placerat in, euismod eu quam. Nullam varius velit in enim sollicitudin pellentesque.
Nunc quam massa, commodo eu malesuada eget, convallis id urna. Vestibulum laoreet semper sem et elementum. Sed fringilla, orci et commodo feugiat, dolor nisl lacinia lectus, eget iaculis dolor erat sit amet eros. Ut eget quam a odio varius posuere sed in neque. Duis et imperdiet est. Nunc eu elit sed libero ullamcorper sagittis nec ut nulla. Donec vehicula felis vitae diam pulvinar placerat volutpat ligula viverra. Duis vel sem purus, id rutrum elit. Nulla ut sapien a purus vestibulum aliquet sit amet in magna. Vivamus mattis dapibus quam, in fringilla lectus bibendum pulvinar. Nunc cursus pharetra sapien id aliquam. Sed lacinia mi non mi luctus vitae tristique nunc fringilla. Aenean quis lacus quis magna tristique dictum faucibus blandit neque. Nam volutpat malesuada luctus.
Proin ullamcorper velit eget mi dapibus vestibulum. Pellentesque tempor venenatis libero id vehicula. Nullam aliquam pharetra ante. Quisque vitae ligula et lacus vehicula cursus in consectetur libero. Nunc euismod elementum felis, a molestie leo vehicula in. Aliquam eu sem et neque semper suscipit et non ligula. Fusce eleifend, magna eget tristique rutrum, ligula dui tempus ipsum, non fringilla lorem felis vitae eros. Suspendisse vel ligula vitae urna molestie tempor quis id felis. Mauris tristique, ligula quis aliquet egestas, mi turpis molestie magna, sit amet rutrum tortor nibh gravida urna. Maecenas pretium lacus arcu. Nulla condimentum neque dolor. Sed eget lacus nunc. Nulla mollis luctus malesuada. Ut libero nulla, dapibus a ultrices quis, interdum eu metus. Duis pulvinar sodales sem ut sollicitudin. Sed at ultrices elit. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Ut ultrices risus quis leo eleifend eget porta quam consequat.
Nulla luctus accumsan venenatis. Fusce neque massa, euismod pharetra suscipit ut, scelerisque nec nisi. Cras congue commodo diam eu luctus. Maecenas eu nunc leo. Nullam luctus convallis rhoncus. Donec semper imperdiet blandit. Curabitur malesuada blandit pulvinar. Proin rhoncus fermentum lorem et placerat. Suspendisse hendrerit velit et neque mattis convallis. Suspendisse viverra lacus sed mi dignissim vitae interdum massa porta. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Vivamus in risus tellus.
Aenean magna mi, tincidunt nec varius nec, pulvinar volutpat augue. Donec consequat purus sit amet libero rhoncus feugiat. Aliquam erat volutpat. Nunc sed felis massa, ut porttitor justo. Maecenas vulputate tortor quis enim sollicitudin eu feugiat elit volutpat. Aliquam erat volutpat. Nunc magna est, egestas volutpat feugiat id, volutpat viverra magna. Donec bibendum, dui vitae pretium consequat, magna purus euismod eros, a accumsan ipsum tortor eu nunc. Quisque suscipit dui magna, et sagittis arcu. Vestibulum posuere mauris non risus sollicitudin ut semper massa dignissim. Nulla lacinia est nec turpis accumsan convallis nec in massa. Quisque imperdiet turpis lacus. Sed porttitor mauris vel lorem interdum vitae aliquet ipsum eleifend.
Curabitur vel est vel turpis vestibulum eleifend. In vel purus a augue ullamcorper auctor vehicula id est. Nulla facilisi. Vestibulum imperdiet quam at nibh tincidunt congue. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. In tempor, est nec aliquam cursus, nibh dolor varius tellus, ut ullamcorper lacus sem non ante. Etiam sed metus id mauris tristique sagittis eget et odio. Proin tellus elit, dapibus sed faucibus vitae, vestibulum quis sapien. Integer at libero ligula, ut luctus augue. Nulla non dui lacus. Quisque consectetur justo nisi, quis fermentum dolor. Integer in mi quis lorem cursus euismod. Pellentesque ut odio ligula, ut fermentum urna. Nullam erat tellus, tincidunt quis gravida quis, auctor at dui.
Nulla ultricies, nibh ut hendrerit mollis, erat mi egestas quam, vel sollicitudin enim metus vitae nisl. Nulla eu nunc eget justo ullamcorper suscipit. Vestibulum euismod arcu ac turpis bibendum sit amet blandit augue egestas. Aliquam consectetur risus sit amet odio volutpat vel fermentum dui mattis. Praesent consectetur dignissim justo sit amet laoreet. Proin facilisis augue in lorem suscipit sollicitudin. Sed accumsan leo quis quam pharetra sodales posuere magna placerat. Praesent convallis tincidunt pretium. Nunc euismod, risus et congue mattis, diam libero laoreet tellus, quis ullamcorper odio leo vel mi. Ut vitae arcu justo, quis vehicula lorem. Pellentesque aliquam velit ut sapien ornare faucibus eu et orci. Integer nulla odio, dictum et porta in, auctor vitae metus. Curabitur sed odio neque, eu faucibus odio. Aliquam volutpat sem at turpis egestas eu pellentesque magna euismod. Curabitur facilisis semper posuere. Phasellus nec enim nec velit blandit ultrices. Nulla suscipit fringilla purus, id semper velit pharetra et.
Proin imperdiet tincidunt est a vehicula. Aliquam ac mi in metus facilisis tempus non a quam. Aliquam pulvinar vehicula aliquet. Integer ultricies tortor iaculis neque pharetra scelerisque. Vestibulum ut augue neque. Nunc aliquet tempus mi in sodales. Nullam sagittis felis quis tortor placerat auctor. Morbi convallis ligula eget diam sollicitudin eu sodales orci luctus. Pellentesque massa orci, convallis sit amet ultricies ut, tempus ac quam. Suspendisse potenti. Nam nibh dui, consectetur malesuada blandit eget, luctus ut ligula. Etiam lacinia molestie venenatis. Vestibulum pharetra eleifend ligula, a cursus purus pulvinar a. Nam rhoncus sodales nisl sagittis viverra. Mauris venenatis tincidunt justo, id dignissim lectus convallis eu. Nulla imperdiet pulvinar nisl ut placerat. Vestibulum lobortis gravida purus vel malesuada. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Mauris fringilla est in felis malesuada ut dictum urna dignissim. Aliquam commodo libero eu nibh malesuada eu adipiscing metus dapibus.
Proin posuere sapien sit amet ante bibendum porta. Donec non libero non purus egestas scelerisque. Cras tristique laoreet arcu, ut porta lacus semper id. Nulla aliquet tincidunt tincidunt. Nulla facilisi. Vivamus sed justo et magna eleifend aliquam. Curabitur tincidunt interdum dolor, quis fringilla leo faucibus eu. In a elit urna, vitae dapibus purus. Sed egestas justo nec ipsum vulputate pharetra. Donec cursus arcu eget lectus consectetur et rutrum risus venenatis. Suspendisse potenti. Duis ac lectus metus. Proin convallis urna ac purus aliquet dignissim. Nam iaculis pellentesque dolor, vel faucibus eros rhoncus ut. Pellentesque in neque vitae sapien lacinia dictum. Etiam placerat luctus rhoncus. Aenean nisl mi, pretium nec hendrerit at, imperdiet non nisi. Integer mi sem, lobortis vel vestibulum et, lacinia vitae orci. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Vestibulum est felis, imperdiet eu pellentesque vel, aliquam at nunc.
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Cras malesuada fringilla nulla, quis euismod nisl iaculis vitae. Phasellus nisl ipsum, suscipit sit amet condimentum ut, interdum quis elit. Curabitur lobortis porttitor est, a porttitor libero dignissim sollicitudin. Maecenas id tempus mi. Nulla aliquet turpis sed purus ultrices consequat. Nulla aliquam fermentum ligula, eu mollis nisl rhoncus id. Nullam tempus consequat arcu a facilisis. Donec nec molestie erat. Nulla nulla magna, consectetur eget ornare sit amet, vestibulum et nisl. Etiam vitae suscipit enim. Duis feugiat leo sed lacus ultrices sollicitudin. In tincidunt hendrerit velit, et suscipit lorem porta id. Sed arcu enim, eleifend ac adipiscing et, varius sodales neque. Fusce viverra ullamcorper magna at congue. Integer molestie justo neque. Maecenas rutrum, lectus sit amet faucibus posuere, nulla sapien porttitor lacus, at tempor lorem sapien non est. Praesent id augue ac dolor imperdiet tincidunt sed in lacus. Nullam tempor tristique dui, ut posuere turpis venenatis in.
Donec varius quam id sem auctor ac sagittis est fermentum. Etiam mattis, tellus tempor placerat porttitor, nisl erat aliquam nibh, id interdum justo risus eget lacus. Proin eget felis odio. Praesent semper dolor a nulla dictum eu consequat magna pulvinar. In et sapien posuere metus viverra gravida. Pellentesque placerat, magna id accumsan sodales, ligula nulla scelerisque ipsum, sit amet pellentesque dolor odio at nibh. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Vivamus quis dolor orci. Aenean rutrum molestie ante et placerat. Praesent faucibus quam id risus dignissim porttitor. Proin tincidunt diam non turpis adipiscing dapibus. Pellentesque accumsan, nibh a ornare semper, urna quam iaculis purus, et faucibus est nulla sit amet nunc. Pellentesque id interdum quam. Quisque tincidunt leo ac dolor placerat tristique. Sed et leo ac erat tincidunt malesuada. Nullam viverra, arcu quis semper interdum, mauris tellus tincidunt nunc, id cursus mi lorem eget turpis. Integer elit purus, luctus at eleifend sodales, posuere quis diam.
Curabitur erat nibh, fringilla nec ornare ut, molestie eget ligula. Nulla eu vestibulum felis. Praesent volutpat venenatis tincidunt. Praesent vehicula adipiscing laoreet. Quisque euismod, sapien nec sodales mattis, lorem libero varius lacus, sit amet ornare metus est ac libero. Cras a elit vel turpis dictum feugiat. Aliquam ligula nibh, tincidunt et lacinia quis, bibendum eget neque. Curabitur sed enim nibh. Donec bibendum, velit sed ullamcorper gravida, libero dui condimentum velit, et consequat nisl tellus eu mi. Sed pretium neque sed lorem venenatis commodo. Phasellus lectus arcu, ullamcorper quis feugiat eu, ultricies et arcu. Integer at lectus nulla, ultrices ultricies leo. Mauris porta mi sed ipsum sodales tempor. Phasellus eu tellus nec mauris luctus aliquam eget id purus. Aliquam erat volutpat. In tortor lacus, dignissim quis pellentesque non, posuere quis tortor. Aliquam ut diam justo, pulvinar volutpat dui. Vivamus fermentum posuere magna, in consectetur arcu euismod faucibus. Aenean sit amet odio metus.
Donec vitae scelerisque metus. Mauris eget est ut metus porttitor sollicitudin eu vitae libero. Aenean cursus nunc vel ipsum varius sit amet tincidunt lacus iaculis. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Morbi sollicitudin, massa nec viverra scelerisque, sapien lectus tincidunt neque, sit amet malesuada justo nibh vel ligula. Donec gravida aliquet eros hendrerit fringilla. Sed interdum, lorem in dictum auctor, neque arcu feugiat nunc, sit amet varius augue velit ut elit. Vivamus id urna lectus. Aenean et turpis facilisis enim aliquam tempus. Sed vel lectus ac sapien faucibus dapibus. Phasellus ultrices sodales ipsum vitae tristique. Ut tortor urna, rutrum ut tincidunt at, auctor id justo. Etiam eu elit eu ligula fringilla euismod vitae euismod justo.
Aliquam urna velit, facilisis sed eleifend non, commodo vitae dolor. Sed non mattis nulla. Nam venenatis adipiscing orci, suscipit adipiscing mauris iaculis et. Integer at tellus arcu, at imperdiet magna. Nunc sed feugiat odio. Quisque interdum turpis vel libero accumsan cursus. Ut aliquam aliquam turpis quis eleifend. Fusce ligula eros, vehicula vitae tempor vel, consectetur at nunc. Vestibulum vel nisi non felis congue tincidunt. Nulla fermentum malesuada nunc, sit amet consequat metus dapibus vitae. In nec dolor eros, dignissim egestas velit. Duis nec lorem lorem. Proin scelerisque enim vitae ipsum posuere vitae aliquam diam convallis. Nam lobortis, lectus vel dapibus elementum, orci neque egestas ante, ut pulvinar orci lacus ac justo. Aliquam erat volutpat. Aenean lacinia ante nec risus semper quis dignissim orci luctus. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Cras non massa velit.
Curabitur quis dui est. Nullam viverra porttitor dui, eget ultricies erat mattis quis. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. In ornare, ligula sit amet aliquet sagittis, nunc nisl accumsan dolor, in interdum magna felis sed nunc. Duis tincidunt, dui eget gravida dapibus, mi dui bibendum ligula, nec varius nisl ipsum in nisi. Fusce a felis eu eros rhoncus rutrum. Vivamus convallis augue a purus interdum vitae vestibulum odio semper. In consectetur urna a dui elementum tempor. Duis fringilla leo et nunc adipiscing vitae mollis tortor hendrerit. Quisque sapien odio, auctor eu vehicula vulputate, sodales ac nulla. Pellentesque at ante a justo congue gravida vitae eu nibh. Sed eu velit enim, id ullamcorper augue. In in enim eu massa dapibus ultricies. Nullam libero elit, dapibus vitae vestibulum in, malesuada non nulla. Nulla porttitor varius enim vel malesuada. Quisque sed diam sed quam malesuada cursus. Praesent elementum consectetur nisl eget pharetra. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.
Maecenas augue ante, pellentesque eget scelerisque at, tincidunt iaculis turpis. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Curabitur sagittis nisi eget quam accumsan porttitor et in ligula. Maecenas aliquam metus sit amet sem mollis ultrices. Curabitur nulla eros, vehicula sed tempor a, rhoncus in magna. Suspendisse laoreet pulvinar blandit. In ullamcorper lacinia porttitor. Sed tincidunt diam vel neque lacinia molestie sollicitudin ac nisl. Proin egestas accumsan odio, sit amet auctor ipsum posuere vitae. Sed lacinia magna a nulla facilisis cursus. Donec elementum tellus sed dui fringilla nec sagittis nisl semper. In pharetra augue at dui ultricies condimentum. Curabitur aliquam odio eu massa dignissim bibendum. Aliquam viverra felis nec sem fermentum imperdiet. In posuere ante fringilla ligula sollicitudin suscipit.
Donec et tellus est. Vivamus sapien lectus, porttitor ac venenatis sit amet, tempor et nisi. Sed sollicitudin malesuada urna sed egestas. Mauris at ultricies ligula. Morbi volutpat ante sed ligula lobortis dignissim. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Etiam ac magna ac nibh blandit consequat. Ut a elit sed nunc luctus hendrerit eu non velit. Sed hendrerit tincidunt metus, et congue ligula egestas ac. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Sed eget adipiscing est. Sed nec metus vel leo suscipit hendrerit. Curabitur dui libero, adipiscing nec sagittis et, varius eget dui. Nullam arcu lorem, gravida quis varius at, fringilla ut erat. Cras posuere posuere tincidunt.
Pellentesque gravida risus non nibh tincidunt dictum. Duis quis tellus odio, vulputate luctus nibh. Sed a orci non elit mollis vestibulum cursus et diam. Proin congue iaculis magna sit amet placerat. Praesent tempus eleifend lacus, nec suscipit libero aliquam elementum. Phasellus a elit tellus, eget sodales enim. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Morbi eget sollicitudin turpis. Maecenas imperdiet, orci sit amet tempor gravida, dui libero lobortis nisi, vel porttitor nunc neque id orci. Pellentesque ornare interdum dui id semper. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Vestibulum et nulla ut risus tempor hendrerit quis id felis. Aliquam vel diam felis. Quisque eleifend ultricies urna sed scelerisque. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos.
Aliquam at metus nunc. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Nullam lobortis viverra est, eget fringilla libero bibendum ut. In ultrices mi sit amet urna ullamcorper at elementum diam facilisis. Suspendisse sit amet purus enim. Duis metus nulla, consequat a sodales vel, imperdiet ac metus. Donec iaculis, nibh nec pulvinar rhoncus, metus magna interdum neque, id blandit eros neque sit amet sem. Sed id dolor eget risus venenatis tempus non lacinia nisl. Aenean consectetur mauris et urna sodales ultricies. Nunc ullamcorper, quam nec varius tincidunt, nibh sem posuere nibh, vitae rhoncus diam tortor ac nunc. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Aliquam erat volutpat.
Maecenas cursus lorem orci, ut ullamcorper mi. Nulla nunc diam, semper in cursus quis, ultrices vel massa. Nullam id erat nec eros dictum sollicitudin. Nam non adipiscing mauris. Aliquam erat volutpat. Vivamus vitae augue odio, eget blandit neque. Donec porttitor neque sed orci aliquet at elementum elit mollis. In placerat nibh in lectus placerat dignissim. Nam at justo non nisi mattis posuere. Etiam suscipit pretium odio, sed vehicula dui cursus nec. In aliquam nunc vitae metus sagittis nec tincidunt massa sollicitudin. Ut nec mauris et massa laoreet condimentum. Etiam non neque congue sapien semper suscipit id vitae nulla. Vivamus ac lectus aliquet risus dignissim pellentesque vel nec arcu. Etiam in pellentesque ligula. Praesent dolor nunc, pretium a convallis non, malesuada in enim. In sed dui vitae leo blandit varius eu vitae nunc. Sed condimentum massa et sapien venenatis et tincidunt sem blandit. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. Vestibulum odio risus, posuere et commodo id, mattis lobortis ligula.
Donec et tincidunt elit. In et libero non tellus ullamcorper aliquam. Duis augue odio, facilisis eget placerat a, egestas quis sapien. Pellentesque tincidunt auctor magna, non pellentesque metus consectetur in. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Etiam dictum urna in arcu euismod in imperdiet enim eleifend. Vivamus egestas eleifend odio at sagittis. Maecenas iaculis eleifend tempus. Ut vehicula tempor nulla ac eleifend. Sed ac laoreet mi. Nulla facilisi. Duis ut erat ipsum. Pellentesque tincidunt elit id urna iaculis venenatis.
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Aenean eget auctor arcu. Praesent rutrum adipiscing fermentum. Sed eu est non elit elementum sagittis. In id placerat felis. Curabitur consectetur urna nec quam elementum vestibulum. Mauris cursus ipsum sit amet risus elementum ullamcorper. Vestibulum pulvinar fringilla ante, accumsan scelerisque sapien lobortis et. Sed dapibus, lacus nec congue porta, massa mi elementum enim, sit amet faucibus mi augue ac lorem. Nullam rutrum aliquet est a volutpat.
Aliquam a lectus libero. Fusce egestas euismod pellentesque. Proin eleifend libero vitae quam tristique eget molestie mauris pulvinar. Donec mollis sapien orci, nec commodo sapien. In eget sapien eros, vel imperdiet est. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Donec porta, ipsum nec dictum adipiscing, urna neque interdum orci, vulputate adipiscing neque urna non eros. Cras interdum ligula a neque condimentum et condimentum magna hendrerit. Nulla dapibus placerat dolor quis vestibulum. Integer fringilla feugiat condimentum.
Fusce venenatis augue quis urna vulputate congue. Vestibulum condimentum pulvinar mauris, sed hendrerit augue cursus nec. Sed mi eros, iaculis quis luctus quis, cursus vel ligula. Duis vel augue gravida nisi scelerisque varius. Sed mattis interdum scelerisque. Morbi lobortis felis ac tortor ultrices gravida sagittis felis molestie. Proin eu augue ac ante aliquet aliquet. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Nulla lorem libero, pulvinar at facilisis non, auctor eleifend felis. Donec a mauris metus, eget cursus nisi. Sed ut purus justo, eu rhoncus urna. Proin sollicitudin odio turpis, vitae placerat risus. Etiam et suscipit dui. Aliquam ac sagittis leo. Quisque ac velit nibh, quis facilisis risus. Donec ligula massa, adipiscing eu posuere id, tincidunt sed diam. Morbi sapien urna, faucibus at lacinia vitae, faucibus id mauris. Praesent eros sem, faucibus sit amet consequat nec, vestibulum vel diam.
Donec tristique libero sed augue fringilla semper. Aliquam purus diam, ornare nec dignissim molestie, rhoncus sed orci. Donec laoreet ante vitae erat accumsan in porttitor lorem laoreet. Phasellus enim dolor, hendrerit ac scelerisque eu, aliquet eu justo. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Quisque quam libero, tincidunt lobortis sagittis ut, tempus vel lorem. Donec congue diam quis ante tincidunt imperdiet. Duis ipsum nulla, dictum non rhoncus ac, venenatis blandit libero. Vivamus tristique neque sit amet purus aliquam at laoreet metus dictum. Pellentesque enim arcu, ultrices vitae sodales eget, interdum et odio. Praesent a porttitor nisi. Vivamus mattis est vel risus faucibus sagittis.
Morbi eu ligula nec nibh iaculis venenatis. Suspendisse augue ipsum, dignissim ut ultricies facilisis, vestibulum eu mauris. Proin lorem massa, porttitor vel aliquet vitae, malesuada sed dolor. Nullam id semper nisi. Fusce lacinia blandit enim a adipiscing. Nam ut nulla mi, in ultrices eros. Mauris nunc magna, cursus vitae cursus sit amet, tristique in sapien. Duis eu felis velit. Maecenas tincidunt massa eu nisl blandit facilisis. Suspendisse volutpat lorem vestibulum lacus vulputate convallis. Morbi eu purus leo, at congue lacus. Donec nisi nibh, consectetur adipiscing accumsan in, pharetra ac mi. Sed tellus mauris, auctor sit amet consectetur eget, imperdiet ut metus. Suspendisse id erat odio.
Donec ut orci sit amet neque elementum convallis nec et lacus. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Fusce in rhoncus ante. Nullam eu felis sed risus egestas blandit ac vitae sem. Quisque rhoncus dui nec augue venenatis varius. Pellentesque nec hendrerit purus. Vivamus mi sem, dictum vitae eleifend tincidunt, tempus in ante. Sed aliquet nisi nec justo euismod ut gravida sem facilisis. Morbi sed tellus vitae arcu lacinia convallis. Maecenas neque nunc, hendrerit et lobortis id, congue eget eros. Sed blandit elit sed purus fermentum ac imperdiet nunc sollicitudin. Aliquam erat volutpat. Aenean libero quam, pulvinar id pellentesque et, facilisis tempor ligula.
Aliquam ac augue ligula, eu fringilla nulla. Quisque vestibulum adipiscing dolor vel pharetra. Donec aliquam dui quis lacus condimentum vehicula. Nam viverra felis diam. Suspendisse lacus justo, molestie rutrum bibendum et, auctor sed turpis. Integer adipiscing mi non leo semper volutpat. Maecenas aliquet, mi eu varius hendrerit, est nibh commodo nisl, eu pellentesque felis magna ut eros. Pellentesque non risus ipsum, ac semper nisl. Pellentesque aliquam iaculis pulvinar. Morbi eleifend, risus non hendrerit gravida, sem urna dictum tellus, non porta nisi neque eu mi. Proin pulvinar lacus eget nisl varius tincidunt. Cras porta interdum nibh sit amet auctor. Phasellus tristique, magna aliquam aliquet aliquam, odio massa tincidunt neque, eget dapibus turpis nisi quis erat. Curabitur sem mauris, laoreet eget dapibus at, tincidunt eget velit. Phasellus odio lectus, malesuada in sollicitudin non, lacinia ut lectus. Aenean placerat quam ac erat ultrices dictum. Praesent vel nibh sed nunc laoreet iaculis nec et metus. Vestibulum et magna magna.
Suspendisse potenti. Aliquam tincidunt libero sed enim luctus commodo. Nulla feugiat scelerisque sapien, ut accumsan sapien ultrices quis. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et magnis dis parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. Maecenas mattis, dolor in pulvinar tempor, elit orci suscipit quam, sit amet tristique libero lectus quis sem. In velit eros, placerat non lacinia id, tincidunt a ipsum. Donec id enim metus. Morbi urna ante, rhoncus quis pellentesque non, congue a turpis. Quisque vel varius est. In viverra odio adipiscing leo venenatis et imperdiet mi gravida. Nulla ut mi metus. Phasellus eu nulla dolor. Nulla vitae pharetra tellus. Donec lectus ante, gravida accumsan vestibulum blandit, tristique non dolor. Cras vulputate libero in sem rutrum faucibus. Nunc vitae scelerisque quam. Vivamus ut libero blandit augue consequat venenatis ut eget magna.
Vivamus in consequat sem. Aenean ipsum arcu, malesuada quis rutrum interdum, vestibulum sed turpis. Nulla dictum, eros lobortis venenatis sollicitudin, lectus enim fringilla justo, et tristique sem nulla id mi. Pellentesque orci ligula, eleifend vel tristique at, congue at est. Quisque quam diam, fermentum eu lacinia a, laoreet nec lacus. Fusce a magna felis. Pellentesque nunc dui, feugiat a adipiscing sed, euismod ac lacus. Vivamus ut tristique sapien. Mauris viverra posuere augue id vestibulum. Nam id ipsum nisi. Vivamus blandit semper lectus nec tristique. Nullam vitae quam id mi tincidunt sagittis. Duis dignissim convallis velit, in imperdiet massa luctus quis. Nullam vehicula suscipit augue, non porta tortor aliquet eget. Suspendisse potenti.
Suspendisse vitae risus ac turpis mattis iaculis sed vitae nunc. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. Mauris venenatis mi sed magna rhoncus rhoncus. Donec non magna ipsum. Duis volutpat porttitor dui, eu aliquam enim hendrerit vel. Aenean bibendum diam eget sapien rhoncus varius. Vivamus id nunc eu neque euismod dignissim vel sed lectus. Aenean sed orci arcu, et placerat quam. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Ut a sem in nunc dignissim placerat vel vitae odio. Nullam porta nulla ut lorem elementum ut euismod nibh feugiat. Mauris venenatis elit vitae quam tristique vitae mollis tellus molestie. Fusce eu mauris magna. Ut purus risus, pretium et feugiat ut, condimentum at diam. Etiam accumsan, enim ut facilisis molestie, magna magna gravida arcu, mollis ornare eros sem eu risus. Nam bibendum nisi et nisi fringilla pulvinar. Donec tincidunt mattis enim vitae eleifend. Curabitur sapien ante, euismod a dictum nec, commodo quis augue.
Maecenas congue, eros quis rutrum pulvinar, felis nunc sagittis massa, ut porttitor velit diam et nisi. Phasellus bibendum augue et odio vehicula eu auctor metus scelerisque. Aenean risus nibh, vestibulum ac laoreet quis, mollis non diam. Phasellus in quam urna, ac lacinia quam. Nullam volutpat eleifend ultrices. Vivamus interdum eleifend leo, id iaculis dui dictum quis. Donec fringilla fermentum ligula, et tincidunt massa dapibus a. Curabitur laoreet scelerisque diam, at aliquet lectus pharetra ut. Vivamus nec orci gravida nulla cursus feugiat. Sed nec leo ut mauris eleifend tempor sed at odio. Nunc eu ante et ante tristique dictum. Maecenas non risus sit amet justo vehicula rhoncus. Pellentesque sagittis sem eu neque varius volutpat. Aenean ac odio eros.
Nulla neque nulla, lacinia a blandit a, ullamcorper id diam. Donec dignissim aliquam nisi vel varius. Nullam posuere interdum nisl, sed scelerisque magna viverra nec. Nullam nunc enim, consectetur vitae semper quis, condimentum sed lectus. Morbi sed congue mi. Fusce ullamcorper pharetra lorem, tristique luctus arcu scelerisque eu. In ante justo, aliquet ut suscipit ut, iaculis ac urna. Vestibulum congue massa volutpat sapien molestie dictum. Maecenas dapibus accumsan eros, eget semper leo laoreet non. Cras quis ipsum purus. Morbi sollicitudin leo quis massa venenatis sed auctor nisi molestie. Fusce congue magna quis tellus aliquam sed egestas nibh hendrerit. Integer dapibus mollis elit, sed ornare odio volutpat sit amet. In non orci sit amet ipsum faucibus imperdiet nec in mi. Nunc a sapien sit amet lorem mattis suscipit nec nec nisi. Integer suscipit lacinia hendrerit. Aenean laoreet, lacus nec aliquam auctor, elit sapien sodales elit, ut dignissim nunc urna vitae tellus. Nullam at magna quis ipsum euismod aliquam sed vitae lacus. Vestibulum non diam in turpis volutpat laoreet. Nulla auctor nisl eu magna varius adipiscing.
Duis non diam orci. Nullam lobortis nulla vel nunc posuere in dignissim nisi tincidunt. Pellentesque metus mi, consectetur et laoreet vel, egestas vel enim. Aliquam laoreet, nibh at pretium euismod, justo ante egestas odio, ac vulputate lacus odio a risus. Nunc convallis, tellus ac tristique malesuada, ante felis pretium magna, vitae faucibus ante enim ac nibh. Nulla neque purus, lacinia id egestas a, porta in est. Aliquam elementum, diam sed tempor pulvinar, tellus mauris feugiat metus, vel varius purus turpis ac nisi. Integer vel libero non elit tincidunt egestas ac quis odio. Nullam in diam sapien, vel suscipit dolor. Nulla pellentesque adipiscing ullamcorper.
Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Nam lacinia sodales lectus a posuere. Quisque nec justo odio, vel bibendum neque. Mauris lobortis odio nec odio tincidunt luctus. Vestibulum consectetur, elit sed accumsan interdum, elit sem pretium mauris, id hendrerit mi ipsum at metus. Cras facilisis tellus eget tortor dapibus adipiscing dapibus leo pharetra. Vivamus pulvinar arcu non lacus placerat luctus. Sed libero nisi, vehicula eu tincidunt et, tempus sed purus. Quisque lacus dui, vulputate sed adipiscing quis, sagittis nec augue. In rutrum magna vel nisi porta aliquam. Praesent hendrerit, tellus nec cursus dictum, lorem leo pulvinar augue, at condimentum erat lacus et orci.
Etiam lobortis orci a neque mattis vel semper lorem fringilla. Proin ultricies rhoncus dui, id posuere libero consequat et. Nam sed ipsum libero, vitae euismod justo. Donec et velit eget nibh sagittis bibendum. Morbi sit amet velit ligula, non tempor felis. Phasellus non enim arcu. Quisque interdum viverra mattis. Vestibulum scelerisque sem et enim porttitor vitae malesuada augue fermentum. Fusce eu diam diam, congue sagittis neque. Suspendisse at nibh ante, mattis elementum justo. Nulla facilisi. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Pellentesque eget lectus at turpis sodales pharetra eu eu nibh. Nullam congue fringilla urna, vitae blandit nulla condimentum sit amet. Aenean est dui, malesuada quis ultrices a, aliquet id lacus. Donec consectetur massa non sapien tincidunt a fermentum felis sodales. Vestibulum vulputate ante a leo ultrices tempor eget id nunc.
Sed lacus arcu, euismod sed rhoncus id, varius eget mauris. Suspendisse sed tellus non est tempus cursus eget eu dolor. Pellentesque orci dui, blandit vel varius et, sodales sed nunc. Aliquam congue nisi in dui rhoncus vitae vehicula lectus iaculis. Sed erat lorem, pellentesque non congue vel, rhoncus et urna. Vestibulum in adipiscing tellus. Vivamus vitae nisi dui, nec placerat tellus. Fusce lacus velit, egestas et rhoncus nec, scelerisque sit amet enim. Vestibulum feugiat faucibus ullamcorper. Nam at orci sit amet odio consequat blandit sit amet in nibh. Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. Integer nec diam leo. Cras in tellus urna. Vivamus accumsan bibendum vehicula. Donec vehicula, mauris ac venenatis scelerisque, arcu leo imperdiet lacus, sed ultrices risus tellus vitae sapien. Vestibulum nibh urna, ornare at tincidunt id, suscipit imperdiet erat. Donec at ligula quam. Curabitur dolor neque, auctor ut luctus nec, iaculis non arcu. Donec enim orci, aliquet id luctus sed, tempor ut ante. Quisque dictum facilisis varius.
Morbi erat libero, cursus a tincidunt ut, malesuada in elit. Vestibulum blandit fermentum urna sit amet adipiscing. Vestibulum aliquam, ligula non dapibus iaculis, dui nunc viverra dui, id interdum erat dui et enim. Maecenas ac arcu purus. Duis id tortor porttitor sapien hendrerit facilisis. In non leo eget lacus vulputate luctus. Donec mollis porta ante, non egestas velit pellentesque a. Vestibulum placerat vehicula erat, sed suscipit odio tempus ac. Sed congue augue nec metus dapibus rutrum. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Cras aliquam sollicitudin odio quis viverra. Duis gravida auctor dolor quis eleifend. In eu enim et erat adipiscing facilisis. Curabitur vel purus a metus luctus tincidunt. Mauris quis ultricies tortor. Maecenas quam augue, congue nec suscipit vitae, dictum at augue. Sed ac nunc tortor, non bibendum ante.
Vivamus ac lectus diam, ac scelerisque nunc. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Pellentesque consequat ipsum ac nibh fermentum suscipit. Praesent eget pulvinar nibh. In vel velit dolor. Donec rhoncus mollis nisl vitae mattis. Pellentesque eu dui urna. Nunc ornare nisi at ante vulputate malesuada. Vivamus eros turpis, scelerisque dictum aliquam nec, lacinia at sapien. Curabitur non augue sit amet purus semper feugiat. Nunc euismod nisi quis metus hendrerit lacinia. Fusce aliquam placerat augue fringilla tincidunt. Pellentesque ut sollicitudin sapien. Donec ut dolor in velit blandit vulputate in in urna. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Cras sit amet est nisl, nec placerat libero. Pellentesque quam odio, tincidunt ut varius vitae, laoreet sed metus. Nam id quam a nisi auctor laoreet.
Quisque feugiat aliquet ipsum, vel fringilla lorem venenatis non. Nunc quis orci nisl. Vestibulum fringilla sem in eros elementum vulputate. Donec vitae odio in orci gravida gravida. Duis scelerisque hendrerit urna eu pulvinar. Aliquam vestibulum aliquet tortor, vel tempor justo varius eget. Etiam sit amet dui dolor. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Mauris fermentum ultrices enim ut fringilla. Aliquam sagittis dolor eget libero ullamcorper eget ultricies eros mollis. Nullam laoreet auctor nulla in blandit. Nullam tincidunt, nisl eu placerat convallis, enim orci mattis sapien, at hendrerit justo nisi iaculis metus. Phasellus sagittis gravida elit quis ornare. Etiam tristique mattis leo, nec sollicitudin sem ultrices vitae. Vestibulum sollicitudin diam non lorem ultrices faucibus. Cras ut lacus massa. Curabitur libero quam, rhoncus bibendum tempor eu, hendrerit sed diam. Sed sit amet lorem dictum lectus pharetra gravida nec et nibh. Donec a mauris mauris.
Nulla egestas nunc eu neque fringilla nec blandit ligula varius. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae; Sed nec magna nulla. Nulla facilisi. Phasellus ut viverra nulla. Aenean orci erat, hendrerit ut vulputate suscipit, ullamcorper sit amet turpis. Suspendisse tristique felis eu ante pharetra laoreet. Phasellus ligula nibh, mattis pellentesque condimentum et, cursus fringilla mauris. Mauris faucibus libero eget nisl suscipit lobortis. Quisque sollicitudin volutpat varius. Aliquam metus magna, posuere a ullamcorper a, adipiscing ac ante. Aliquam vehicula facilisis ante, eu interdum mi tristique mattis. Donec accumsan mi vitae sapien mollis eget pharetra quam porttitor. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Aenean lobortis tristique ultrices. Donec ornare convallis nibh, sagittis auctor quam viverra ultrices. Nam ante ante, sodales eu dignissim laoreet, rutrum non felis. Pellentesque nec euismod eros. Duis ac lectus nibh.
Curabitur vel euismod orci. Etiam in nisi sem, nec pellentesque nulla. Integer eget lobortis neque. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Vivamus quis odio a tellus facilisis adipiscing et ut nisi. Pellentesque accumsan porttitor quam at porttitor. Donec nisi enim, bibendum nec varius quis, auctor eu lacus. Curabitur tempor arcu non sem molestie sed scelerisque ligula blandit. Maecenas posuere, velit sed pellentesque cursus, arcu est ornare odio, vitae lacinia massa urna nec felis. In tempor pretium massa, ut semper arcu semper nec. Quisque bibendum molestie hendrerit. Nullam eleifend odio eget turpis ultrices quis dignissim urna pretium. Vivamus sit amet tellus mauris, et mattis lacus. Donec mattis scelerisque erat non sodales. Sed a ligula augue. Vivamus mattis dui tellus, pretium faucibus leo. Fusce et justo dui, at rutrum nibh. Vestibulum ante ipsum primis in faucibus orci luctus et ultrices posuere cubilia Curae;
Maecenas pulvinar augue quis ante aliquam nec laoreet velit faucibus. Vivamus viverra accumsan risus, at dapibus nibh vulputate et. Donec fringilla sapien sollicitudin augue pretium lacinia. Cras varius lectus et libero iaculis sollicitudin. Suspendisse eu ante erat. Proin non nisi ante. Duis venenatis tempor nibh, eget cursus augue dapibus ac. Suspendisse a molestie nulla. Mauris vel nisl nisl. Phasellus tincidunt suscipit elementum. Praesent quis viverra tellus. Cras rhoncus interdum tempor. Pellentesque porttitor ultricies neque eu dignissim. Nullam consectetur metus quis dolor fringilla et dictum libero fringilla.
Aenean egestas iaculis tempus. Duis ac velit eros. Nunc eget pulvinar nunc. Aenean lorem eros, fermentum sed interdum sit amet, feugiat at elit. Phasellus vel nisl eget dolor semper placerat. Aliquam erat volutpat. Quisque in metus sit amet arcu hendrerit venenatis. Vestibulum at iaculis augue. Sed in lorem nulla. Nullam euismod interdum odio at euismod.
Morbi et justo ac justo faucibus tempor ac id enim. Ut ut nulla nibh, a congue odio. Suspendisse augue lorem, dignissim nec luctus eu, egestas sed lorem. Duis et magna eget ante hendrerit luctus quis vel justo. Vestibulum aliquam enim eget ligula pharetra vitae euismod diam dignissim. Proin vestibulum condimentum leo, eget aliquam purus porta tristique. Ut imperdiet euismod nunc eu lacinia. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Aliquam id leo dolor. Curabitur sed mi est, vitae sodales nibh. Vivamus rhoncus facilisis lacus in tempus. Duis urna ipsum, egestas nec accumsan et, euismod a eros. Nunc a ipsum nisi, id varius ligula. Morbi ut sapien diam, pulvinar volutpat purus. Vivamus at nunc quis ligula egestas tristique vel in enim.
Morbi ullamcorper purus ut lorem cursus commodo. Vivamus enim dolor, tincidunt at facilisis eget, cursus a justo. In scelerisque nunc eu ante malesuada congue. Donec porta enim non lorem viverra egestas et et nisl. Sed viverra, arcu consectetur blandit vulputate, lectus metus porta libero, vitae lacinia ante turpis a odio. Integer elementum, metus at ornare imperdiet, erat odio ultricies tortor, sit amet viverra diam enim eget eros. Proin at mi a lorem vestibulum scelerisque id eget est. Nam quam sapien, dignissim vel pharetra a, consequat a nisi. Sed eleifend tortor at libero suscipit et venenatis ligula semper. Sed imperdiet rutrum ullamcorper. Integer congue interdum massa tincidunt luctus. Aliquam scelerisque, nunc ut suscipit tincidunt, elit tortor ultricies tortor, nec molestie odio nulla nec enim. Fusce orci metus, faucibus ac fermentum a, faucibus id dolor. Vivamus ut accumsan erat. Nam et magna eu tortor ultricies luctus. Integer tincidunt dolor eu dolor fringilla laoreet. Nullam congue aliquam dolor, egestas vestibulum odio egestas id. Fusce at lacinia metus. Donec auctor massa in leo lobortis sed ullamcorper dui convallis. Sed rhoncus, orci nec porttitor iaculis, eros justo dignissim augue, eget adipiscing augue ipsum in ipsum.
Duis semper, metus quis varius cursus, velit massa condimentum risus, at lobortis nisi enim eu erat. Curabitur sit amet felis mauris, id tristique libero. Etiam vitae sem mi. Aliquam erat volutpat. Donec aliquam, nunc in pulvinar rhoncus, nisl augue porta orci, et tincidunt mauris lectus eu quam. Praesent sed consectetur tortor. Mauris turpis erat, mollis eget suscipit blandit, blandit at risus. Suspendisse et quam vel ipsum convallis viverra. Nam euismod arcu et massa interdum rutrum. Cras vel augue nec dolor ullamcorper vestibulum eu eget elit. Aenean aliquet felis quis orci malesuada volutpat. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Nam fermentum enim accumsan nisi venenatis non feugiat tortor gravida.
In urna mi, dignissim at dignissim suscipit, pharetra vitae elit. Ut vitae massa nibh, eget egestas eros. Vestibulum imperdiet ipsum sit amet turpis vestibulum laoreet. Proin neque turpis, tristique sollicitudin laoreet non, lobortis at nisl. Nunc vehicula volutpat est sed rhoncus. Curabitur sed velit neque, sit amet tincidunt massa. Maecenas aliquam blandit euismod. Donec condimentum eros vel ipsum luctus pellentesque ornare odio dapibus. Fusce eleifend lacinia placerat. Suspendisse purus tellus, aliquam vitae rutrum at, dictum sit amet ante. Nam et orci est. Phasellus eleifend posuere nulla, eget eleifend tortor volutpat eu. Vivamus lacinia placerat felis. Pellentesque habitant morbi tristique senectus et netus et malesuada fames ac turpis egestas. Ut hendrerit molestie vestibulum. Quisque aliquam libero sit amet purus consectetur id aliquam arcu pretium. Vestibulum sed sapien nunc, vel pulvinar nisi. Fusce lorem justo, rutrum vitae rhoncus eget, tempus a dolor. Donec egestas lectus ac purus porttitor vitae sollicitudin risus euismod. Suspendisse id lorem ac tellus malesuada aliquet.
Nam in erat turpis. Maecenas auctor hendrerit bibendum. Vestibulum diam enim, accumsan vel gravida vel, posuere ut urna. Mauris at tincidunt magna. Cras ornare imperdiet dolor, sed aliquam nibh congue sagittis. Quisque rhoncus aliquam lacus, quis rhoncus enim rhoncus vitae. Nulla dui velit, laoreet ut faucibus id, blandit a elit. Duis odio lacus, dignissim eget porta a, pellentesque non tortor. In viverra, lacus sit amet auctor posuere, purus ligula vestibulum magna, at porttitor nulla nulla ut ipsum. Aenean a nunc congue nunc luctus pretium eget eget nunc. In eu ligula libero. Mauris tristique congue odio, vitae commodo urna bibendum et. Phasellus sodales, libero a ultrices lobortis, lectus tellus adipiscing mi, vitae fringilla felis odio ac tortor. Morbi luctus felis in lorem vehicula tempus. Proin ipsum dui, porttitor a convallis id, consectetur bibendum velit. Aenean sagittis augue sed nisl tempus varius.
Nunc malesuada tristique velit vel scelerisque. Donec aliquet, arcu id consequat adipiscing, libero neque dapibus est, id pharetra nisl dolor id libero. Mauris convallis est eu libero dignissim porttitor. Morbi tincidunt molestie tempus. Nam rhoncus elit ultrices augue tempor ut faucibus odio rhoncus. Nam congue, magna a laoreet tincidunt, tortor eros rhoncus magna, a facilisis nisi magna non erat. Pellentesque ultrices pellentesque pulvinar. Ut placerat facilisis purus, id laoreet tortor lacinia at. Quisque aliquet, tortor eget dapibus porta, odio dolor feugiat arcu, vitae euismod leo nulla a lectus. Aliquam quis ipsum nulla, eu adipiscing nulla. Sed non libero sit amet quam hendrerit pretium. Donec ac lobortis urna. Proin interdum faucibus vulputate.
Ut nec dapibus sapien. Maecenas sollicitudin congue orci, eu malesuada ipsum dignissim et. Nullam quis interdum nibh. Integer at interdum eros. Nulla condimentum pretium orci ac sodales. Nam tincidunt placerat tincidunt. Class aptent taciti sociosqu ad litora torquent per conubia nostra, per inceptos himenaeos. Praesent a odio nunc, vel faucibus nisi. Donec congue suscipit eleifend. Morbi tristique laoreet nisl, eu pulvinar eros molestie ac. Sed egestas gravida luctus. Integer ut eros nunc, in porttitor sem. Etiam tortor ipsum, feugiat eu mattis et, tincidunt sed lectus. Pellentesque tempus sapien cursus neque bibendum eget elementum erat tincidunt.
Suspendisse tristique suscipit purus et mattis. In hac habitasse platea dictumst. Etiam dui justo, porta et tristique sit amet, gravida at nulla. Ut et lectus id magna mollis vulputate sed eget mi. Phasellus laoreet, felis et dapibus aliquam, dolor dolor dapibus orci, nec congue urna metus quis eros. Phasellus eget nibh purus. Suspendisse vehicula elit eget orci aliquet interdum. Donec faucibus erat quis eros hendrerit accumsan. Morbi erat tellus, sodales vel suscipit vitae, imperdiet cursus erat. Aenean accumsan fermentum nunc, convallis mollis elit interdum ornare. Pellentesque facilisis, erat id eleifend tristique, nisl urna pellentesque est, nec auctor lacus leo eget massa. Integer ac sem velit. Nam dignissim ornare sapien, sit amet semper diam vestibulum et. Nam tellus arcu, hendrerit ac dapibus sed, auctor et mauris.
Sed sollicitudin auctor purus, vitae molestie nibh faucibus at. Proin viverra, elit ut imperdiet rhoncus, libero nisl blandit eros, ac sodales purus orci sit amet nulla. In mollis eros facilisis dui lobortis at pellentesque dui semper. Vivamus arcu elit, pellentesque vel tristique eget, sodales a purus.
philosophical and spiritual issues including psychological revolution, the nature of the mind, meditation, human relationships, and bringing about positivesocial change. Maintaining that society is ultimately the product of the interactions of individuals, he held that fundamental change in society can emerge only through freely undertaken radical change in the individual. Krishnamurti stressed the need for a revolution in the psyche of every human being and posited that such revolution cannot be brought about by any external entity, be it religious, political, or social.
Born into a Telugu family in what was then colonial India, Krishnamurti lived next to the Theosophical Society headquarters at Adyar in Madras in his early adolescence. At Adyar, he encountered prominent occultist and Theosophist Charles Webster Leadbeater. He was subsequently raised under the tutelageof Leadbeater and Annie Besant, leaders of the Theosophical Society at the time. Leadbeater and Besant believed Krishnamurti to be the likely vehicle for amessianic entity, the so-called World Teacher. As a young man, he disavowed this idea and dissolved the worldwide organization (the Order of the Star) established to support it.
Krishnamurti denounced the concept of saviors, spiritual leaders, or any other intermediaries to reality, and urged people to directly discover the underlying causes of the problems facing individuals and society. Such discovery he considered the natural outcome of unconditional, absolute psychological freedom, which he proclaimed to be within reach of everyone, irrespective of background, ability, or disposition. He vowed to work towards this goal of universal psychological freedom, and stated that understanding the actual relationships individuals have with themselves, society, and nature is of vital importance in attaining this objective.
He declared allegiance to no nationality, caste, religion, or philosophy, and spent the rest of his life traveling the world as an independent speaker. He authored several books, among them The First and Last Freedom (1954), The Only Revolution (1969), and Krishnamurti's Notebook (1976). A large collection of his talks and discussions have also been published. His last public talk was in Madras, India, in January 1986, a month before his death at his home in Ojai, California. Krishnamurti supporters, working through several non-profit foundations, oversee a number of independent schools centered on his views on education – in India, the United Kingdom, and the United States – and continue to actively transcribe and distribute his spoken and written works.
[edit]Biography
[edit]Birth and early years
[edit]Family background and childhood
The Jiddu household – Birth of Krishnamurti
Jiddu[1] Krishnamurti came from a family of Telugu-speaking Brahmins.[2] His father, Jiddu Narayaniah, was employed as an official of the then colonial British Administration. Krishnamurti was very fond of his mother Sanjeevamma, who died when he was ten.[3] His parents were second cousins, having a total of eleven children, only six of whom survived childhood.[4] As was common among pioushigh-caste Hindus, the family was keenly observant of traditional and religious practices.[5]
He was born on 12 May[6] 1895 in the small town of Madanapalle of the Madras Presidency (modern-day Chittoor District in Andhra Pradesh). In accordance with common Hindu practice, as the eighth child who happened to be male, he was named after the Hindu deity Krishna.[7]
Move to Cudappah – A sensitive and sickly child
In 1903 the family settled in Cudappah, where Krishnamurti during a previous stay had contracted malaria, a disease with which he would suffer recurrent bouts over many years.[8] He was a sensitive and sickly child; "vague and dreamy", he was often taken to be mentally retarded, and was beaten regularly at school by his teachers and at home by his father.[9] Writing about his childhood and early adolescence in memoirs he composed when he was eighteen years old, Krishnamurti described psychic experiences such as "seeing" his sister, who had died in 1904, and also his mother, who had died in 1905.[10] Elsewhere he mentions another aspect of his childhood – a bond and closeness with nature – that apparently persisted throughout his life.[11] His biographers describe among his other childhood traits an innate generosity and a religious vein.[12]
At Adyar
Krishnamurti's father Narayaniah retired at the end of 1907 and being of limited means wrote to Annie Besant,[13] then President of the Theosophical Society, seeking employment at its headquarters estate at Adyar. The Society, a quasi-mystical, religio-philosophical organization, had been founded 1875 in New York City. It had attracted disproportionate international media and public interest, and was then influential in Indian society;[14] in addition to being an observant orthodox Brahmin, Narayaniah had been a Theosophist since 1882.[15] He was eventually hired by the Society as a clerk, and he and four sons (his remaining family) moved there in January 1909.[16] They were at first assigned a small dilapidated cottage which was located just outside the Theosophical compound. The living arrangements exacerbated the boys' already "shocking physical condition", Krishnamurti and his brothers having arrived at Adyar undernourished, covered in mosquito bites, and infested with lice.[17]
[edit]His "discovery" and its consequences
Charles Webster Leadbeater
A few months later, in late April or early May[18] 1909, Krishnamurti first met influential Theosophist Charles Webster Leadbeater.[19] During regular walks to the Theosophical estate's beach at the nearby Adyar river, Leadbeater, who claimed clairvoyance, had noticed Krishnamurti (who also frequented the beach with others) and was impressed by the "most wonderful aura he had ever seen, without a particle of selfishness in it."[20] In contrast, Krishnamurti's outward appearance was according to eyewitnesses pretty common, unimpressive, and unkempt. He was also considered "particularly dim-witted"; he often had "a vacant expression" that "gave him an almost moronic look". Leadbeater remained "unshaken" that the boy would become "a spiritual teacher and a greatorator", and likely to be used as the "vehicle for the Lord Maitreya" – the latter, according to Theosophical doctrine, an advanced spiritual entity that periodically appears on earth as a World Teacher to guide the evolution of humankind. This would happen, Leadbeater added, "unless something went wrong".[21]
Pupul Jayakar, in her biography of Krishnamurti, quotes him speaking of that period in his life some 75 years later: "The boy had always said, 'I will do whatever you want'. There was an element of subservience, obedience. The boy was vague, uncertain, woolly; he didn't seem to care what was happening. He was like a vessel, with a large hole in it, whatever was put in, went through, nothing remained."[22]
Under the care of Theosophists
Following his "discovery"[23] Krishnamurti was taken under the wing of the leadership of the Theosophical Society in Adyar and their inner circle. Leadbeater and a small number of trusted associates undertook the task of educating, protecting, and in general preparing him as the likely "vehicle" of the expected World Teacher. Krishnamurti (or Krishnaji as he was often later called)[24] and his younger brother Nityananda ("Nitya", 1898–1925) were privately tutored at the Theosophical compound in Madras, and were later exposed to a comparatively opulent lifestyle among a segment of European high society, as they continued their education abroad. In spite of his history of problems with school work and concerns about his capacities and physical condition, the fourteen-year-old Krishnamurti within six months was able to speak and write competently in English.[25] He later came to view his "discovery" as a life-saving event: "Krishna [Krishnamurti] was often asked in later life what he thought would have happened to him if he had not been 'discovered' by Leadbeater. He would unhesitatingly reply, 'I would have died'."[26]
Annie Besant
During this time Krishnamurti had developed a strong bond with Annie Besant and considered her a surrogate mother.[27] Following his early close relationship with his biological mother, this was the first of several important and intimate relationships that Krishnamurti established with women during his lifetime. His father, who had initially assented to Besant's legal guardianship of Krishnamurti,[28]was pushed into the background by the swirl of attention around his son and in 1912 sued Besant and the Theosophical Society to protect his parental interests. After a protracted legal battle, Besant took custody of Krishnamurti and Nitya.[29][30] As a result of this separation from his family and home, Krishnamurti and his brother (whose relationship had always been very close) became more dependent on each other, and in the following years they often traveled together.[31]
Order of the Star in the East
In 1911 the leadership of the Theosophical Society at Adyar established a new organization, called the Order of the Star in the East (OSE) to prepare the world for the expected appearance of the World Teacher. Krishnamurti was named as its head, while senior Theosophists were installed in its various other positions. Membership was open to anyone who accepted the doctrine of the Coming of the World Teacher – however, most of the early members were also members of the Theosophical Society.[32] The new organization and its mission received widespread publicity and worldwide press coverage; controversy erupted soon after, within the Theosophical Society and without, in Hindu circles, and in the Indian and international press.[29][33]
[edit]Growing up
Preparing the "vehicle"
Mary Lutyens, in her biography of Krishnamurti, states that there was a time when he fully believed that he was to become the World Teacher after correct spiritual and secular guidance and education.[34] Another biographer describes the daily program imposed on him by Leadbeater and his associates, which included rigorous exercise and sports, tutoring in a variety of school subjects, Theosophical and religious lessons, yoga and meditation, as well as instruction in proper hygiene and in the ways of British society and culture.[35] At the same time, Leadbeater personally assumed the role of guide in a parallel, mystical instruction of young Krishnamurti; the existence and progress of this instruction was at the time known only to the leadership of the Society and a close-knit circle of associates.[36]
Unlike sports, in which he showed natural aptitude, Krishnamurti always had problems with formal schooling and was not academically inclined. He eventually gave up university education after several attempts at admission. He did take to foreign languages, in time speaking several (French and Italian among them) with some fluency. In this period he apparently enjoyed reading parts of the Old Testament, and was impressed by some of the Western classics, especially works by Shelley, Dostoyevsky and Nietzsche.[37] He also had, since childhood, considerable observational and mechanical skills, being able to correctly disassemble and reassemble complicated machinery.[38]
His public image as originally cultivated by the Theosophists "was to be characterized by a well-polished exterior, a sobriety of purpose, a cosmopolitan outlook and an otherworldly, almost beatificdetachment in his demeanor."[39] And in fact, "all of these can be said to have characterized Krishnamurti's public image to the end of his life."[39] It was apparently clear early on that he "possessed an innate personal magnetism, not of a warm physical variety, but nonetheless emotive in its austerity, and inclined to inspire veneration."[40] However, as he was growing up, Krishnamurti showed signs of adolescent rebellion and emotional instability, chafing at the regimen imposed on him, being highly uncomfortable with the publicity surrounding him, and occasionally having doubts about the future prescribed him.[41]
Out of India – First writings and speeches

Krishnamurti in England in 1911 with his brother Nitya and the Theosophists Annie Besant and George Arundale
Krishnamurti and Nitya were taken to England for the first time in April 1911.[42] During this trip Krishnamurti gave his first public speech, to young members of the OSE in London.[43] The first writings of his had also started to appear, published in booklets by the Theosophical Society and in Theosophical and OSE-affiliated magazines.[44] Between 1911 and the start of World War I in 1914, the brothers visited several other European countries, always accompanied by Theosophist chaperones.[45] Meanwhile Krishnamurti had for the first time acquired a measure of personal financial independence, thanks to a lifetime annuity provided by a wealthy benefactress.[46]
More travels abroad – In love
After the war, Krishnamurti (again accompanied by Nitya, by then the "Organizing Secretary" of the Order)[47] embarked on a series of lectures, meetings and discussions around the world related to his duties as the head of the OSE, and also continued writing.[48] Like most of his contemporary writings, the content of his talks revolved around the work of the Order and of its members in preparation for the Coming, while his vocabulary reflected the prevailing Theosophical concepts and terminology. In the beginning he was described as a halting, hesitant, and repetitive speaker, but there was steady improvement in his delivery and confidence, and he gradually took command of the meetings.[49]
In early 1921 he became ill with bronchitis while in France, a condition that "almost became chronic."[50] He also fell in love for the first time – in September 1921 with Helen Knothe, a seventeen-year-old American whose family was involved in the Theosophical Society. The experience was tempered by the realization that his work and expected life-mission precluded what would otherwise be considered normal relationships, and by the mid-1920s the two of them had "drifted apart".[51]
[edit]Start of the "process" and the death of Nitya
Concern about Nitya's health – At Ojai
In 1922 Krishnamurti and Nitya travelled from Sydney to California on their way to Switzerland. While in California, they stayed at a cottage in the relatively secluded Ojai Valley, offered to them for the occasion by an American member of the Order. It was thought that the area's unique climate would be beneficial to Nitya, who had been diagnosed with tuberculosis; Nitya's often ailing health would become a near-constant source of worry for Krishnamurti.[52] At Ojai they met Rosalind Williams, a young American who became close to them both, and who was to later have a significant role in Krishnamurti's life.[53] For the first time the brothers were without immediate supervision by their Theosophical Society minders.[54] They found the Ojai Valley to be very agreeable, and eventually atrust formed by supporters purchased for them the cottage and surrounding property, which henceforth became Krishnamurti's official place of residence.[55]
Strange experiences
It was in August–September 1922, during the initial stay at Ojai, that Krishnamurti went through an intense, "life-changing" experience.[56] It has been simultaneously and invariably characterised as a spiritual awakening, a psychological transformation, and a physical conditioning. The initial events happened in two distinct phases: first a three-day spiritual experience followed, two weeks later, by a longer-lasting condition that Krishnamurti and those around him would refer to as the process; this condition would recur, at frequent intervals and with varying intensity, until his death.[57]
According to witnesses it all started on 17 August 1922, with Krishnamurti complaining of extraordinary pain at the nape of his neck and a hard, ball-like swelling. Over the next couple of days the symptoms worsened, with increasing pain, extreme physical discomfort and sensitivity, total loss of appetite and occasional delirious ramblings. Then, he seemed to lapse into unconsciousness; instead he recounted that he was very much aware of his surroundings, and that while in that state he had an experience of mystical union.[58] The following day the symptoms and the experience intensified, climaxing with a sense of "immense peace".[59]
Following – and apparently related to – these events,[60] in early September a strange condition, which came to be known as the process, started as an almost nightly, regular, occurrence. These new incidents continued with short intermissions until October; later, the process would resume intermittently. As in the separate three-day experience of August, the process involved varying degrees of pain, physical discomfort and sensitivity, occasionally a lapse into a childlike state, and sometimes an apparent fading out of consciousness explained – by Krishnamurti or those attending him – as either his body giving in to pain, or as him "going off".[61]
These experiences were accompanied, or followed, by what was interchangeably described as presence, benediction, immensity, and sacredness, a state distinct from the process. This state – said to have been often felt by others present – would later, and increasingly, often reoccur independently of the process. Krishnamurti regularly substituted the other or the otherness as shorthand description for this particular experience; also as a way of conveying the sense of impenetrability regarding this otherness, the strange sensibility it effected, and the unusual state of consciousness it precipitated, as described in his diaries and elsewhere.[62]
Consequences
The above events, and subsequent occurrences of the process, were not revealed publicly until 1975, while Krishnamurti's descriptions of both the process and of the other were first published a year later, in 1976.[63] Since the initial occurrences of 1922, several explanations have been proposed for these events and for the process in general.[64] Leadbeater and other Theosophists expected the "vehicle" to have certain paranormal experiences, but were nevertheless mystified by these developments, and unable to explain the whole thing.[65] During Krishnamurti's later years the continuingprocess often came up as a subject in private discussions between himself and his closest associates; these discussions shed some light on the subject, but were ultimately inconclusive regarding its nature and provenance.[66] Whatever the case, the process, and the inability of Leadbeater to explain it satisfactorily, if at all, had other consequences according to biographer Roland Vernon:
The process at Ojai, whatever its cause or validity, was a cataclysmic milestone for Krishna. Up until this time his spiritual progress, chequered though it might have been, had been planned with solemn deliberation by Theosophy's grandees. ... Something new had now occurred for which Krishna's training had not entirely prepared him. ... A burden was lifted from his conscience and he took his first step towards becoming an individual. ... In terms of his future role as a teacher, the process was his bedrock. ... It had come to him alone and had not been planted in him by his mentors ... it provided Krishna with the soil in which his newfound spirit of confidence and independence could take root.[67]
Expecting the Messiah
In the meantime the rumors concerning the messianic status of Krishnamurti had reached fever pitch as the 1925 Theosophical Society Convention was planned, on the 50th anniversary of its founding, with high expectations – among Theosophists and OSE members – of significant happenings.[68] Paralleling the increasing adulation was Krishnamurti's growing discomfort with it. In related developments, prominent Theosophists and their factions within the Society were trying to favorably position themselves relative to the Coming, which was widely rumoured to be approaching; "extraordinary" pronouncements of spiritual advancement were made by various parties, disputed by others, and the internal Theosophical politics further alienated Krishnamurti.[69]
Nitya dies
Nitya's persistent health problems had periodically resurfaced throughout this time and were a continuing cause for concern; on 13 November 1925, at age 27, he died in Ojai from complications ofinfluenza and tuberculosis.[70] Despite Nitya's poor health, his death was completely unexpected by Krishnamurti, and fundamentally shook his belief in Theosophy and his faith in the leaders of the Theosophical Society. He had received their assurances regarding Nitya's health, and had come to believe that "Nitya was essential for [his] life-mission and therefore he would not be allowed to die", a belief shared by Annie Besant and Krishnamurti's circle.[71] Jayakar wrote that "his belief in the "Masters" and the hierarchy had undergone a total revolution."[72][73] Moreover, Nitya had been the "last surviving link to his family and childhood. ... The only person to whom he could talk openly, his best friend and companion".[74] According to eyewitness accounts the news "broke him completely".[75]He struggled for days to overcome his sorrow: "Day after day we watched him heart-broken, disillusioned. Day after day he seemed to change, gripping himself together to face life .... He was going through an inner revolution, finding new strength."[75] Jayakar stated that in later years "Krishnamurti accepted that perhaps the intensity of sorrow had triggered a vast, wordless perception"[72] while Vernon suggests that in the end, "[Krishnamurti] discovered, at the root of sorrow, an emptiness that could be not be touched by hurt".[74] Twelve days after Nitya's death he was "immensely quiet, radiant, and free of all sentiment and emotion";[72] "there was not a shadow ... to show what he had been through."[76] The experience of his brother's death seems to have shattered any remaining illusions, and a "new vision" was now "coming into being".[77]
[edit]Break with the past
The "new vision" takes hold
Over the next few years Krishnamurti's new vision and consciousness continued to develop. New concepts appeared in his talks, discussions, and correspondence, together with an evolving vocabulary that was progressively free of Theosophical terminology.[78] The main themes in his meetings started to diverge from the well-defined tenets of Theosophy and from the concrete steps the members of the Order of the Star had to undertake, and into more abstract and flexible concepts, which would be Happiness one year, Questioning Authority the next, and Liberation the following; he had also started to publicly disagree with senior Theosophists and Theosophical doctrine.[79] His new direction reached a climax in 1929, when he rebuffed attempts by Leadbeater and Besant to continue with the Order of the Star.
Dissolution and aftermath
Krishnamurti dissolved the Order during the annual Star Camp at Ommen, the Netherlands, on 3 August 1929[80] in front of Annie Besant, three thousand members, and a radio audience.[81] In the so-called Dissolution Speech, he stated that he had made his decision after "careful consideration" during the previous two years, and said among other things:
I maintain that truth is a pathless land, and you cannot approach it by any path whatsoever, by any religion, by any sect. That is my point of view, and I adhere to that absolutely and unconditionally. Truth, being limitless, unconditioned, unapproachable by any path whatsoever, cannot be organized; nor should any organization be formed to lead or coerce people along a particular path. ... This is no magnificent deed, because I do not want followers, and I mean this. The moment you follow someone you cease to follow Truth. I am not concerned whether you pay attention to what I say or not. I want to do a certain thing in the world and I am going to do it with unwavering concentration. I am concerning myself with only one essential thing: to set man free. I desire to free him from all cages, from all fears, and not to found religions, new sects, nor to establish new theories and new philosophies.[82]
Following the dissolution prominent Theosophists openly or under various guises turned against Krishnamurti, including Leadbeater who reputedly stated, "the Coming had gone wrong".[83] Krishnamurti had denounced all organized belief, the notion of gurus, and the whole teacher-follower relationship, vowing instead to work in setting people "absolutely, unconditionally free".[82] There is no record of him explicitly denying he was the World Teacher;[84] whenever he was asked to clarify his position, he either asserted the matter was irrelevant,[85] or gave answers that, as he stated, were vague on purpose.[86] In reflection of the ongoing changes in his outlook, he had started doing so before the dissolution of the Order of the Star.[87] The subtlety of the new distinctions on the World Teacher issue was lost on many of his admirers, who were already bewildered or distraught because of the changes in Krishnamurti’s outlook, vocabulary and pronouncements – among them Annie Besant and Mary Lutyens' mother Emily.[88] He eventually disassociated himself from the Theosophical Society and its teachings and practices,[89] yet he remained on cordial terms with some of its members and ex-members throughout his life.
The new message
Krishnamurti would often refer to the totality of his work as "the" teachings and not as "my" teachings.[90] His concern was always about "the teachings"; the teacher had no importance, and all authority, especially psychological authority, was denounced:
All authority of any kind, especially in the field of thought and understanding, is the most destructive, evil thing. Leaders destroy the followers and followers destroy the leaders. You have to be your own teacher and your own disciple. You have to question everything that man has accepted as valuable, as necessary.[91]
This includes inward authority:
Having realized that we can depend on no outside authority ... there is the immensely greater difficulty of rejecting our own inward authority, the authority of our own particular little experiences and accumulated opinions, knowledge, ideas and ideals.[92]
However such pronouncements were not endorsements of social or personal disorder; on the contrary, the total freedom he advocated would in his view result in complete order:
Order is necessary, complete, absolute, inward order and that is not possible if there is no virtue, and virtue is the natural outcome of freedom. But freedom is not doing what you want to do nor is it revolting against the established order, adopting a laissez faire attitude to life or becoming a hippy. Freedom comes into being only when we understand, not intellectually but actually, our every day life, our activity, our way of thought, the fact of our brutality, our callousness and indifference; it is to be actually in contact with our colossal selfishness.[93]
He furthermore declared that such understanding on the part of individuals, if genuine, should produce an impact on society as a whole by default:
That is the only way to judge: in what way are you freer, greater, more dangerous to every Society which is based on the false and the unessential? ... Those who really desire to understand, ... will be a danger to everything that is unessential, to unrealities, to shadows.[82]
Krishnamurti on his own
Krishnamurti resigned from the various trusts and other organizations that were affiliated with the defunct Order of the Star, including the Theosophical Society. He returned the monies and properties donated to the Order, among them a castle in the Netherlands and 5,000 acres (20 km2) of land,[94] to their donors.[95] He spent the rest of his life holding dialogues and giving public talks around the world on the nature of belief, truth, sorrow, freedom, death, and the quest for a spiritually fulfilled life. He accepted neither followers nor worshipers, regarding the relationship between disciple and guru as encouraging dependency and exploitation. He accepted gifts and financial support freely offered to him by people inspired by his work, and continued with lecture tours and the publication of books and talk transcripts for more than half a century.[96] He constantly urged people to think independently and clearly. He invited them to "easily, affably" explore and discuss specific topics together with him, "as two friends"[97] who, in a break with the past, make a fresh start towards a "journey of discovery".[98]
[edit]Middle years
[edit]New beginning
The Rajagopals
From 1930 through 1944 Krishnamurti engaged in speaking tours and in the issue of publications under the auspice of the Star Publishing Trust (SPT), in which he was involved with Rajagopalacharya Desikacharya (commonly D. Rajagopal or "Raja"), a close associate and friend from the Order of the Star.[99] The base of operations for the new enterprise was in California, where Krishnamurti, D. Rajagopal, and Rosalind Williams (by then the wife of D. Rajagopal), lived in close proximity at the Ojai property that was Krishnamurti's official residence.[100] Materially, not much had changed after the dissolution of the Order; Krishnamurti "lacked for nothing, and his lifestyle remained as affluent as before" yet "there is no evidence to suggest that he was in any way dependent on material comfort."[101] The business and organizational aspects of the SPT were administered chiefly by D. Rajagopal, as Krishnamurti devoted his time to speaking and meditation, "content to leave all practical matters, which bored him, especially financial matters, in Rajagopal's undoubtebly capable hands."[102] The Rajagopals' marriage was not a happy one, and the two became physically estranged following the birth of their daughter Radha in 1931.[103] Shortly afterwards, in the relative seclusion of Ojai, Krishnamurti's close friendship with Rosalind deepened into a love affair that continued for many years, a fact not made public until 1991.[104][105]
Education and the first Krishnamurti school
During this period of time the Rishi Valley School, the first of several schools based on Krishnamurti's educational ideas, opened in India.[106] This school and others in India and elsewhere continue to operate under the auspices of the Krishnamurti Foundations.[107] Proper education, incorporating a holistic approach and the rearing of children into sane, whole individuals free of conflict, had been a major, continuing concern of his.[108] Instead of specific methods or techniques, he emphasized the role of educators and secondly, the overall school environment, and spoke of the need to "educate the educator" into a teacher who is teaching "not for profit, not along a certain line, a teacher who is giving, growing and cultivating intelligence, because he himself is cultivating intelligence in himself."[109] However as of 1980 Krishnamurti's concerns regarding right education[110] remained unsatisfied. When asked about the result of – by that time – nearly 50 years of educational work at the various Krishnamurti Schools around the world, he answered that "not a single new mind" had been created.[111]
Delivering the new message
After the dissolution of the Order of the Star and the break with Theosophy there was no falling off of the audiences attending the talks, with new people taking the place of those that abandoned him, as several of the old devotees "were unable to follow him in what seemed to them mists of abstraction."[112] New people also joined the camps, which were by then open to the general public, and Krishnamurti was invited to many new parts of the world. Mary Lutyens states that "his audiences were to become, increasingly, of a different calibre, people interested in what he had to say, not in what they had been told he was."[113]
Throughout the 1930s Krishnamurti spoke in Europe, Latin America, India, Australia and the United States, garnering favorable interest, although in a few occasions he encountered hostility or opposition during this period of growing global turmoil.[114] Another matter was the audiences' apparent inability to grasp his post-Theosophical message; he expressed exasperation over this both privately and publicly, and one of the reasons for his shifting vocabulary was the lifelong[115] effort to convey the teaching in a way that was both precise and easy to understand. He was repeatedly asking his audiences to consider his message in a spirit of open inquiry, carefully and neutrally, while warning them against mistaking verbalizations for actualities.[116] He wrote to Emily Lutyens that the meetings had "quantity without quality"[117] and he was vexed by the refusal of ex-Order of the Star and Theosophical Society members to let go of the past. He acknowledged that what he was articulating could seem just like another hard-to-understand theory; he asked his audiences to act on it instead:
To awaken that intelligence there must be the deep urge to know but not to speculate. Please bear in mind that what to me is a certainty, a fact, must be to you a theory, and the mere repetition of my words does not constitute your knowledge and actuality; it can be but a hypothesis, nothing more. Only through experimentation and action can you discern for yourself its reality. Then it is of no person, neither yours nor mine.[118]

